[Page 1]
Ancient Indian and Greek philosophers have always wonder ed about the unknown and unseen form of matter. The idea of divisibility of matter was considered long back in India, around 500 BC. An Indian philosopher Maharishi Kanad, postulated that if we go on dividing matter (padarth), we shall get smaller and smaller particles. Ultimately, a stage will come when we shall come across the smallest particles beyond which further division will not be possible. He named these particles Par manu . Another Indian philosopher , Pakudha Katyayama, elaborated this doctrine and said that these particles nor mally exist in a combined for m which gives us various forms of matter. Around the same era, ancient Gr eek philosophers – Democritus and Leucippus suggested that if we go on dividing matter, a stage will come when particles obtained cannot be divided further. Democritus called these indivisible particles atoms (meaning indivisible). All this was based on philosophical considerations and not much experimental work to validate these ideas could be done till the eighteenth century. By the end of the eighteenth century, scientists r ecognised the difference between elements and compounds and naturally became interested in finding out how and why elements combine and what happens when they combine. Antoine L. Lavoisier laid the foundation of chemical sciences by establishing two important laws of chemical combination. 3.1 Laws of Chemical Combination The following two laws of chemical combination were established after much experimentations by Lavoisier and Joseph L. Proust. 3.1.1 LAW OF CONSERVATION OF MASS Is there a change in mass when a chemical change (chemical reaction) takes place? Activity ______________ 3.1 • Take one of the following sets, X and Y of chemicals— X Y (i) copper sulphate sodium carbonate (ii) barium chloride sodium sulphate (iii) lead nitrate sodium chloride • Prepare separately a 5% solution of any one pair of substances listed under X and Y each in 10 mL in water. • Take a little amount of solution of Y in a conical flask and some solution of X in an ignition tube. • Hang the ignition tube in the flask carefully; see that the solutions do not get mixed. Put a cork on the flask (see Fig. 3.1). Fig. 3.1: Ignition tube containing solution of X, dipped in a conical flask containing solution of Y 3 AAA AATOMS TOMSTOMS TOMSTOMS AND ANDAND ANDAND M M M M MOLECULESOLECULESOLECULESOLECULESOLECULES C hapter Reprint 2025-26
op =o haptered nb ER ol ope oe vriet 98 ATOMS AND MOLECULES Ancient Indian and Greek philosophers have = much experimentations by Lavoisier and always wondered about the unknown and — Joseph L. Proust. unseen form of matter. The idea of divisibility of matter was considered long back in India. — 3.1.1. LAW OF CONSERVATION OF MASS around 500 BC. An Indian philosopher Maharishi Kanad, postulated that ifwe goon Is there a change in mass when a chemical dividing matter (padarth), we shall get smaller change (chemical reaction) takes place? and smaller particles. Ultimately, a stage will sttest come when we shall come across the smallest Activity — 3.1 particles beyond which further division will e Take one of the following sets, X and Y not be possible. He named these particles of chemicals— : Parmanu. Another Indian philosopher. xX Y Pakudha Katyayama, elaborated this doctrine (i) copper sulphate sodium carbonate and said that these particles normally exist in a combined form which gives us various Qi} harium chloride sodium sulphate forms of matter. Around the same era, ancient Greek (iii) lead nitrate sodium chloride philosophers - Democritus and Leucippus | suggested that if we go on dividing matter, a ° Prepare separately a 5% solution of whe , . sth, artiolme . any one pair of substances listed stage will come when particles obtained ler X and Y cach in 10 ml in water cannot be divided further. Democritus called an : re ae . « ‘ van . Take a little amount of solution of Y in these indivisible particles atoms (meaning a conical flask and some solution of indivisible). All this was hased on X in an ignition tube. philosophical considerations and not much * Hang the ignition tube in the flask experimental work to validate these ideas carefully: see that the solutions do not could be done till the eighteenth century. get mixed. Put a cork on the flask By the end of the eighteenth century. (see Fig. 3.1). scientists recognised the difference between Yn Cork elements and compounds and naturally Y became interested in finding out how and why Uy 6 Thread elements combine and what happens when they combine. . Conical flask Antoine L. Lavoisier laid the foundation \ of chemical sciences by establishing two <3 Small ignition tube important laws of chemical combination. a ]*\ Solution of X 3.1 Laws of Chemical Combination Et Sohation of ¥ The following two laws of chemical Fig. 3.1: ignition tube containing solution of X, dipped combination were established after tna conical flask containing solution of ¥ Reprint 2025-26

[Page 2]
ATOMS AND MOLECULES 27 • Weigh the flask with its contents carefully. • Now tilt and swirl the flask, so that the solutions X and Y get mixed. • Weigh again. • What happens in the reaction flask? • Do you think that a chemical r eaction has taken place? • Why should we put a cork on the mouth of the flask? • Does the mass of the flask and its contents change? Law of conservation of mass states that mass can neither be created nor destroyed in a chemical reaction. 3.1.2 LAW OF CONSTANT PROPORTIONS Lavoisier, along with other scientists, noted that many compounds were composed of two or more elements and each such compound had the same elements in the same proportions, irrespective of where the compound came from or who prepared it. In a compound such as water, the ratio of the mass of hydrogen to the mass of oxygen is always 1:8, whatever the source of water. Thus, if 9 g of water is decomposed, 1 g of hydrogen and 8 g of oxygen are always obtained. Similarly in ammonia, nitrogen and hydrogen are always present in the ratio 14:3 by mass, whatever the method or the source from which it is obtained. This led to the law of constant proportions which is also known as the law of definite proportions. This law was stated by Proust as “In a chemical substance the elements are always present in definite proportions by mass”. The next problem faced by scientists was to give appropriate explanations of these laws. British chemist John Dalton provided the basic theory about the natur e of matter . Dalton picked up the idea of divisibility of matter, which was till then just a philosophy. He took the name ‘atoms’ as given by the Greeks and said that the smallest particles of matter are atoms. His theory was based on the laws of chemical combination. Dalton’s atomic theory provided an explanation for the law of conservation of mass and the law of definite proportions. John Dalton was born in a poor weaver’s family in 1766 in England. He began his car eer as a teacher at the age of twelve. Seven years later he became a school principal. In 1793, Dalton left for Manchester to teach mathematics, physics and chemistry in a college. He spent most of his life there teaching and researching. In 1808, he presented his atomic theory which was a turning point in the study of matter. According to Dalton’s atomic theory, all matter, whether an element, a compound or a mixture is composed of small particles called atoms. The postulates of this theory may be stated as follows: (i) All matter is made of very tiny particles called atoms, which participate in chemical reactions. (ii) Atoms are indivisible particles, which cannot be cr eated or destr oyed in a chemical reaction. (iii) Atoms of a given element are identical in mass and chemical properties. (iv) Atoms of dif fer ent elements have dif fer ent masses and chemical properties. (v) Atoms combine in the ratio of small whole numbers to form compounds. (vi) The r elative number and kinds of atoms are constant in a given compound. You will study in the next chapter that all atoms are made up of still smaller particles. uestions 1. In a r eaction, 5.3 g of sodium carbonate reacted with 6 g of acetic acid. The products were 2.2 g of carbon dioxide, 0.9 g water and 8.2 g of sodium acetate. Show that these Q John Dalton Reprint 2025-26
e = =Weigh the flask with its contents conservation of mass and the law of carefully. definite proportions. . Now tilt and swirl the flask, so that the solutions X and Y¥ get mixed. John Dalton was born in © Weigh again. a poor weaver's family in fry . What happens in the reaction Nask? 1766 in England. He 4 6 . Do you think that a chemical reaction began his career as a }, @ i has taken place? teacher at the age of e Why should we puta cork on the mouth twelve. Seven years later “4 of the flask? he became a school Vv . . Does the mass of the flask and its principal. In 1793, Dalton contents change? left for Manchester to Ny Law of conservation of mass states that teach — mathematics, John Dalton physics and chemistry in mass can neither be created nor destroyed in a college. He spent most of his life there a chemical reaction. teaching and researching. In 1808. he 3.1.2 LAW OF CONSTANT PROPORTIONS presented his atomic theory which was a turning point in the study of matter. Lavoisier, along with other scientists, noted that many compounds were composed of two According to Dalton’s atomic theory, all or more elements and each such compound — matter, whether an element, a compound or had the same elements in the same — amixture is composed of small particles called proportions, irrespective of where the atoms. The postulates of this theory may be compound came from or who prepared it. stated as follows: Ina compound such as water, the ratio of (i) All matter is made of very tiny particles the mass of hydrogen to the mass of oxygen is called atoms, which participate in always 1:8, whatever the source of water. Thus, chemical reactions. if 9 g of water is decomposed, 1 g of hydrogen {ii) Atoms are indivisible particles, which and 8 g of oxygen are always obtained. cannot be created or destroyed in a Similarly in ammonia, nitrogen and hydrogen chemical reaction. are always present in the ratio 14:3 by mass, {ili) Atoms of a given element are identical whatever the method or the source from which in mass and chemical properties. it is obtained. {iv) Atoms of different elements have This led to the law of constant proportions different: masses and chemical which is also known as the law of definite properties. . proportions. This law was stated by Proust as {v] Atoms combine in the ratio of small “In a chemical substance the elements are whole numbers to form compounds. always present in definite proportions by {vi) The relative number and kinds of mass”. atoms are constant in a given The next problem faced by scientists was compound. to give appropriate explanations of these laws. You will study in the next chapter that all British chemist John Dalton provided the atoms are made up of still smaller particles. basic theory about the nature of matter. at : Dalton picked up the idea of divisibility of (1 vestious matter, which was ull then just a philosophy. | fof a reaction, 5.3 g of sodium He took the name ‘atoms’ as given by the carbonate reacted with 6 @ of Greeks and said that the smallest particles of acetic acid. The products were matter are atoms, His theory was based on the | 2.2 8 of carbon dioxide, 0.9 g laws of chemical combination. Dalton’s atomic y Water and &.2 2 of sodium theory provided an explanation for the law of acetate. Show that these Arous ann Motions 27 Reprint 2025-26 :

[Page 3]
SCIENCE28 We might think that if atoms ar e so insignificant in size, why should we care about them? This is because our entire world is made up of atoms. We may not be able to see them, but they are there, and constantly affecting whatever we do. Through modern techniques, we can now produce magnified images of surfaces of elements showing atoms. observations are in agreement with the law of conservation of mass. sodium carbonate + acetic acid → sodium acetate + carbon dioxide + water 2. Hydrogen and oxygen combine in the ratio of 1:8 by mass to form water. What mass of oxygen gas would be r equir ed to react completely with 3 g of hydrogen gas? 3. Which postulate of Dalton’s atomic theory is the result of the law of conservation of mass? 4. Which postulate of Dalton’s atomic theory can explain the law of definite proportions? 3.2 What is an Atom? Have you ever observed a mason building walls, from these walls a r oom and then a collection of rooms to form a building? What is the building block of the huge building? What about the building block of an ant-hill? It is a small grain of sand. Similarly, the building blocks of all matter are atoms. How big are atoms? Atoms are very small, they are smaller than anything that we can imagine or compar e with. Mor e than millions of atoms when stacked would make a layer barely as thick as this sheet of paper. Atomic radius is measured in nanometres. 1/10 9 m = 1 nm 1 m = 109 nm Relative Sizes Radii (in m) Example 10–10 Atom of hydrogen 10–9 Molecule of water 10–8 Molecule of haemoglobin 10–4 Grain of sand 10–3 Ant 10–1 Apple Fig. 3.2: An image of the surface of silicon 3.2.1 WHAT ARE THE MODERN DAY SYMBOLS OF ATOMS OF DIFFERENT ELEMENTS ? Dalton was the first scientist to use the symbols for elements in a very specific sense. When he used a symbol for an element he also meant a definite quantity of that element, that is, one atom of that element. Berzilius suggested that the symbols of elements be made from one or two letters of the name of the element. Fig. 3.3: Symbols for some elements as proposed by Dalton Reprint 2025-26
observations are in agreement We might think that if atoms are so with the law of conservation of insignificant in size, why should we care about LISS, them? This is because our entire world is made sodium carbonate + acctic acid up of atoms. We may not be able to see them, » sodium acctate + carbon but they are there, and constantly affecting dioxide + water whatever we do. Through modern techniques, 2. Hydrogen and oxvgcn combine in we can now produce magnified images of the ratio of 1:8 by mass to form surfaces of elements showing atoms. Water, What mass of oXVECH Gas . would be requircd to react completely with 3 g of hydrogen gas? & Which postulate of Dalton’s atomic (heory is the result of the law of conscrvation of niass? 4. Which postulate of Dalton’s atomic theory can explain dhe baw of detinite proporions? 3.2 What is an Atom? Have you ever observed a mason building walls, from these walls a room and then a Fig. 3.2: An finage of the surface of silicon collection of rooms to form a building? What is the building block of the huge building? What about the building block ofan ant-hill? 3.2.1 WHAT ARE THE MODERN DAY It is a small grain of sand. Similarly, the SYMBOLS OF ATOMS OF DIFFERENT building blocks of all matter are atoms. ELEMENTS? How big are atoms? Dalton was the first scientist to use the Atoms are very small, they are smaller than . tee sien os canes symbols for elements in a very specific sense. anything that we can imagine or compare i . - : oa ee : When he used a symbol for an element he with. More than millions of atoms when : . . also meant a definite quantity of that element. stacked would make a layer barely as thick . - ae we , . that is. one atom of that element. Berzilius as this sheet of paper. : suggested that the symbols of elements be Atomic radius fs measured in nanometres. made from one or two letters of the name of 1/10*m = Inm the element. lm = 10%nm Relative Sizes () Hydrogen OQ Carbon @ Oxygen Radit (in m) 4 s a or - Molecule of water (cS) Copper @ Lead (8) Silver Molecule of haemoglobin - Fig. 3.3: Syinbols for some elernents as proposed by Apple hen 28 Sewence Reprint 2025-26

[Page 4]
ATOMS AND MOLECULES 29 In the beginning, the names of elements were derived from the name of the place where they were found for the first time. For example, the name copper was taken from Cyprus. Some names were taken from specific colours. For example, gold was taken from the English word meaning yellow. Now-a-days, IUPAC (International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry) is an international scientific organisation which approves names of elements, symbols and units. Many of the symbols are the first one or two letters of the element’s name in English. The first letter of a symbol is always written as a capital letter (uppercase) and the second letter as a small letter (lowercase). For example (i) hydrogen, H (ii) aluminium, Al and not AL (iii) cobalt, Co and not CO. Symbols of some elements are formed from the first letter of the name and a letter , appearing later in the name. Examples are: (i) chlorine, Cl, (ii) zinc, Zn etc. Other symbols have been taken from the names of elements in Latin, German or Greek. For example, the symbol of iron is Fe from its Latin name ferrum, sodium is Na from natrium, potassium is K from kalium. Therefore, each element has a name and a unique chemical symbol. (The above table is given for you to refer to whenever you study about elements. Do not bother to memorise all in one go. With the passage of time and repeated usage you will automatically be able to reproduce the symbols). 3.2.2 ATOMIC MASS The most remarkable concept that Dalton’s atomic theory proposed was that of the atomic mass. According to him, each element had a characteristic atomic mass. The theory could explain the law of constant proportions so well that scientists were prompted to measure the atomic mass of an atom. Since determining the mass of an individual atom was a relatively difficult task, relative atomic masses were determined using the laws of chemical combinations and the compounds formed. Let us take the example of a compound, carbon monoxide (CO) formed by carbon and oxygen. It was observed experimentally that 3 g of carbon combines with 4 g of oxygen to form CO. In other words, carbon combines with 4/3 times its mass of oxygen. Suppose we define the atomic mass unit (earlier abbreviated as ‘amu’, but according to the latest IUPAC recommendations, it is now written as ‘u’ – unified mass) as equal to the mass of one carbon atom, then we would assign carbon an atomic mass of 1.0 u and oxygen an atomic mass of 1.33 u. However, it is more convenient to have these numbers as Table 3.1: Symbols for some elements Element Symbol Element Symbol Element Symbol Aluminium Al Copper Cu Nitrogen N Argon Ar Fluorine F Oxygen O Barium Ba Gold Au Potassium K Boron B Hydrogen H Silicon Si Bromine Br Iodine I Silver Ag Calcium Ca Iron Fe Sodium Na Carbon C Lead Pb Sulphur S Chlorine Cl Magnesium Mg Uranium U Cobalt Co Neon Ne Zinc Zn Reprint 2025-26
In the beginning, the names ofelements passage of time and repeated usage you will were derived from the name of the place automatically be able to reproduce where they were found for the first time. For the symbols). example, the name copper was taken from Cyprus. Some names were taken from se . vee specific colours. For example. gold was taken 3.2.2 ATOMIC MASS from the English word meaning yellow. The most remarkable concept that Dalton’s Now-a-days, IUPAC {International Union of atomic theory proposed was that of the atomic Pure and Applied Chemistry) is an ass. Ace di sto hi ach element had ¢ international scientific organisation which — M@SS. According to him, each element had a approves names of elements, symbols and — characteristic atomic mass. The theory could units. Many of the symbols are the first one explain the law of constant proportions so well or two letters of the element's name in that scientists were prompted to measure the English. The first letter ofa symbol is always atomic mass of an atom. Since determining the written as a capital letter (uppercase) and the mass of an individual atom was a relatively second letter as a small letter (lowercase). , . difficult task, relative atomic masses were For example determined using the laws of chemical (i) hydrogen, H combinations and the compounds formed. (ii) aluminium, Aland not Al. Let us take the example of a compound, (iii) cobalt, Co and not CO. carbon monoxide (CO) formed by carbon and Symbols of some elements are formed from oxygen. It was observed experimentally that 3 the first letter of the name and a letter, ¢ of carbon combines with 4 g of oxygen to tine in the name. Examples are: (i form CO. In other words, carbon combines Other symbols have been taken from the with 4/3 times its mass of oxygen. Suppose names of elements in Latin, German or Greek. We define the atomic mass unit (earlier For example, the symbol of iron is Fe from its — abbreviated as ‘amu’, but according to the Latin name ferrum, sodium is Na from natrium, latest IUPAC recommendations, it is now potassium is K from kalium, Therefore. each written as ‘uv’ - unified mass) as equal to the element has a name and a unique mass of one carbon atom, then we would chemical symbol. Table 3.1: Symbols for some elements Element Symbol Element Symbol Element Symbol Aluminium Al Copper Cu Nitrogen N Argon Ar Fluorine F Oxygen 0 Barium Ba Gold Au Potassium K Boron B Hydrogen H Silicon St Bromine Br lodine I Silver Ag Calcium Ca Iron Fe Sodium Na Carbon Cc Lead Pb Sulphur $s Chlorine cl Magnesium Mg Uranium U Cobalt Co Neon Ne Zinc zn (The above table is given for you to refer to assign carbon an atomic mass of 1.0 u and whenever you study about elements. Do not oxygen an atomic mass of 1.33 u. However, it bother to memorise all in one go. With the — is more convenient to have these numbers as Arous ann Motions 29 Reprint 2025-26

[Page 5]
SCIENCE30 whole numbers or as near to a whole numbers as possible. While sear ching for various atomic mass units, scientists initially took 1/ 16 of the mass of an atom of naturally occurring oxygen as the unit. This was considered relevant due to two reasons: • oxygen reacted with a lar ge number of elements and formed compounds. • this atomic mass unit gave masses of most of the elements as whole numbers. However , in 1961 for a universally accepted atomic mass unit, carbon-12 isotope was chosen as the standar d r eference for measuring atomic masses. One atomic mass unit is a mass unit equal to exactly one-twelfth (1/12th) the mass of one atom of carbon-12. The r elative atomic masses of all elements have been found with r espect to an atom of carbon-12. Imagine a fruit seller selling fruits without any standard weight with him. He takes a watermelon and says, “this has a mass equal to 12 units” (12 watermelon units or 12 fruit mass units). He makes twelve equal pieces of the watermelon and finds the mass of each fruit he is selling, relative to the mass of one piece of the watermelon. Now he sells his fruits by relative fruit mass unit (fmu), as in Fig. 3.4. Fig. 3.4 : (a) Watermelon, (b) 12 pieces, (c) 1/12 of watermelon, (d) how the fruit seller can weigh the fruits using pieces of watermelon Similarly, the relative atomic mass of the atom of an element is defined as the average mass of the atom, as compared to 1/12th the mass of one carbon-12 atom. Table 3.2: Atomic masses of a few elements Element Atomic Mass (u) Hydrogen 1 Carbon 12 Nitrogen 14 Oxygen 16 Sodium 23 Magnesium 24 Sulphur 32 Chlorine 35.5 Calcium 40 3.2.3 HOW DO ATOMS EXIST? Atoms of most elements are not able to exist independently. Atoms for m molecules and ions. These molecules or ions aggr egate in large numbers to form the matter that we can see, feel or touch. uestions 1. Define the atomic mass unit. 2. Why is it not possible to see an atom with naked eyes? 3.3 What is a Molecule? A molecule is in general a group of two or more atoms that are chemically bonded together, that is, tightly held together by attractive forces. A molecule can be defined as the smallest particle of an element or a compound that is capable of an independent existence and shows all the properties of that substance. Atoms of the same element or of different elements can join together to form molecules. Q Reprint 2025-26
whole numbers or as near toa whole numbers — mass of the atom, as compared to 1/12" the as possible. While searching for various — mass of one carbon-12 atom. atomic mass units, scientists initially took 1/ 16 of the mass of an atom of naturally Table 3.2: Atomic masses of occurring oxygen as the unit. This was a few elements considered relevant due to two reasons: e oxygen reacted with a large number of Element. Atomic Mass (u) elements and formed compounds. drow e this atomic mass unit gave masses of Hydrogen ! most of the elements as whole numbers. Carbon 12 However, in 1961 for a universally Nitrogen 14 accepted atomic mass unit, carbon-12 isotope Oxi 16 was chosen as the standard reference for xygen measuring atomic masses. One atomic mass Sodium 23 unit is a mass unit equal to exactly one-twelfth Magnesium 24 (1/12) the mass of one atom of carbon-12. oe The relative atomic masses of all elements Sulphur 32 have been found with respect to an atom of Chlorine 35.5 carbon- 12. Calcium 40 Imagine a fruit seller selling fruits without any standard weight with him. He takes a watermelon and says, “this has a mass equal 3.2.3 How bo ATOMS EXIST? to 12 units” (12 watermelon units or 12 fruit mass units). He makes twelve equal pieces of | Atoms of most elements are not able to exist the watermelon and finds the mass ofeach fruit independently. Atoms form molecules and he is selling, relative to the mass of one piece — ions. These molecules or ions aggregate in of the watermelon. Now he sells his fruits by large numbers to form the matter that we can relative fruit mass unit (fmu), as in Fig. 3.4. see, feel or touch. ( nestions ww 1.) Detine the atomic niass wit ta) (b) ) | 2. Why is it not possible to sec an i) atom With naked eves? 3.3, What is a Molecule? A molecule is in general a group of two or more atoms that are chemically bonded (an together, that is. tightly held together by attractive forces. A molecule can be defined Fig. 3.4 : (0) Watermelon, (b) 12 pieces, (co) 1/12 of — a8 the smallest particle of an element or a watermelon, (d) how the fruit seller can compound that is capable of an independent weigh the fruits using pieces ofwatermelon existence and shows all the properties of that substance. Atoms of the same element or of Similarly, the relative atomic mass of the different elements can join together to form atom of an element is defined as the average — molecules. 30 Sewence Reprint 2025-26

[Page 6]
ATOMS AND MOLECULES 31 3.3.1 MOLECULES OF ELEMENTS The molecules of an element are constituted by the same type of atoms. Molecules of many elements, such as argon (Ar), helium (He) etc. are made up of only one atom of that element. But this is not the case with most of the non- metals. For example, a molecule of oxygen consists of two atoms of oxygen and hence it is known as a diatomic molecule, O 2. If 3 atoms of oxygen unite into a molecule, instead of the usual 2, we get ozone, O3. The number of atoms constituting a molecule is known as its atomicity. Metals and some other elements, such as carbon, do not have a simple structur e but consist of a very large and indefinite number of atoms bonded together. Let us look at the atomicity of some non-metals. Table 3.3 : Atomicity of some elements Type of Name Atomicity Element Non-Metal Argon Monoatomic Helium Monoatomic Oxygen Diatomic Hydrogen Diatomic Nitrogen Diatomic Chlorine Diatomic Phosphorus Tetra-atomic Sulphur Poly-atomic Table 3.4 : Molecules of some compounds Compound Combining Ratio Elements by Mass Water (H2O) Hydrogen, Oxygen 1:8 Ammonia (NH3) Nitrogen, Hydrogen 14:3 Carbon dioxide (CO2) Carbon, Oxygen 3:8 Activity ______________ 3.2 • Refer to Table 3.4 for ratio by mass of atoms present in molecules and Table 3.2 for atomic masses of elements. Find the ratio by number of the atoms of elements in the molecules of compounds given in Table 3.4. • The ratio by number of atoms for a water molecule can be found as follows: Element Ratio Atomic Mass Simplest by mass ratio/ ratio mass (u) atomic mass H 1 1 1 1 =1 2 O 8 16 8 16 = 1 2 1 • Thus, the ratio by number of atoms for water is H:O = 2:1. 3.3.3 WHAT IS AN ION? Compounds composed of metals and non- metals contain charged species. The char ged species are known as ions. Ions may consist of a single charged atom or a group of atoms that have a net charge on them. An ion can be negatively or positively charged. A negatively charged ion is called an ‘anion’ and the positively charged ion, a ‘cation’. Take, for example, sodium chloride (NaCl). Its constituent particles are positively charged sodium ions (Na +) and negatively charged 3.3.2 MOLECULES OF COMPOUNDS Atoms of different elements join together in definite proportions to form molecules of compounds. Few examples are given in Table 3.4. Reprint 2025-26
3.3.1, MOLECULES OF ELEMENTS Table 3.4 : Molecules of some The molecules of an element are constituted compounds by the same type of atoms. Molecules of many Compound Combining Ratio elements, such as argon (Ar), helium (He) ete. Elements by are made up of only one atom of that element. Mass But this is not the case with most of the non- Water (HO) Hydrogen, Oxygen 1:8 metals. For example, a molecule of oxygen Ammonia (NH,) Nitrogen. Hydrogen 14:3 consists of two atoms of oxygen and hence it k d nolecule, O,. 163 CarPen is known as a diatomic molecule, O,. 3 dioxide (CO,) Carbon. Oxygen 3:8 atoms of oxygen unite into a molecule, instead of the usual 2, we get ozone, O,. The number . of atoms constituting a molecule is known as Activity 3 its atomicity. ¢ — Refer to Table 3.4 for ratio by mass of Metals and some other elements, such as atoms present in molecules and Table carbon, do not have a simple structure but 3.2 for atomic masses of elements. Find . . . the ratio by number of the atoms of consist of a very large and indefinite number 7. . elements in the molecules of of atoms bonded together. compounds given in Table 3.4. Let us look at the atomicity of some e = The ratio by number of atoms for a non-metals. water molecule can he found as follows: Element | Ratio |Atomic| Mass |Simplest Table 3.3 : Atomicity of some by | mass | ratio/| ratio elements mass | (u) [atomic mass Type of Name Atomicity oy = 1 Element. H 1 1 7 =] 2 Non-Metal Argon Monoatomic gol Helium Monoatomic ce) 8 16 iar l 6 Oxygen Diatomic drog . . ¢ ‘Thus, the ratio by number of atoms tor Hydrogen Diatomic water is HO = 2:1, Nitrogen Diatomic Chlorine Diatomic 3.3.3, WHAT IS AN ION? Phosphorus — Tetra-atomic Compounds composed of metals and non- Sulphur Poly-atomic metals contain charged species. The charged . species are known as fons. lons may consist of a single charged atom or a group of atoms that have a net charge on them. An ion can be negatively or positively charged. A negatively 3.3.2 MOLECULES OF COMPOUNDS charged ion is called an ‘anion’ and the Atoms of different elements join together positively charged ion, a ‘cation’. Take. for in definite proportions to form molecules example. sodium chloride (NaCl). Its of compounds. Few examples are given in constituent particles are positively charged Table 3.4. sodium ions (Na‘) and negatively charged Arous ann Motions 31 Reprint 2025-26

[Page 7]
SCIENCE32 chloride ions (Cl–). A group of atoms carrying a charge is known as a polyatomic ion (Table 3.6). We shall learn more about the formation of ions in Chapter 4. learn the symbols and combining capacity of the elements. The combining power (or capacity) of an element is known as its valency. Valency can be used to find out how the atoms of an element will combine with the atom(s) of another element to form a chemical compound. The valency of the atom of an element can be thought of as hands or arms of that atom. Human beings have two arms and an octopus has eight. If one octopus has to catch hold of a few people in such a manner that all the eight arms of the octopus and both arms of all the humans are locked, how many humans do you think the octopus can hold? Represent the octopus with O and humans with H. Can you write a formula for this combination? Do you get OH4 as the formula? The subscript 4 indicates the number of humans held by the octopus. The valencies of some common ions are given in Table 3.6. We will learn more about valency in the next chapter. * Some elements show more than one valency. A Roman numeral shows their valency in a bracket. Table 3.5: Some ionic compounds Ionic Constituting Ratio Compound Elements by Mass Calcium oxide Calcium and oxygen 5:2 Magnesium Magnesium sulphide and sulphur 3:4 Sodium Sodium chloride and chlorine 23:35.5 3.4 Writing Chemical Formulae The chemical formula of a compound is a symbolic representation of its composition. The chemical formulae of different compounds can be written easily. For this exercise, we need to Table 3.6: Names and symbols of some ions Vale- Name of Symbol Non- Symbol Polyatomic Symbol ncy ion metallic ions element 1. Sodium Na+ Hydrogen H+ Ammonium NH4 + Potassium K+ Hydride H- Hydroxide OH– Silver Ag+ Chloride Cl- Nitrate NO3 – Copper (I)* Cu+ Bromide Br- Hydrogen Iodide I– carbonate HCO3 – 2. Magnesium Mg2+ Oxide O2- Carbonate CO3 2– Calcium Ca2+ Sulphide S2- Sulphite SO3 2– Zinc Zn2+ Sulphate SO4 2– Iron (II)* Fe2+ Copper (II)* Cu2+ 3. Aluminium Al3+ Nitride N3- Phosphate PO4 3– Iron (III)* Fe3+ Reprint 2025-26
chloride ions (Cl). A group of atoms carrying — learn the symbols and combining capacity of a charge is Known as a polyatomic ion (Table the elements. 3.6). We shall learn more about the formation The combining power (or capacity) of an of fons in Chapter 4. element is known as its valency. Valency can be used to find out how the atoms of an Table 3.5: Some ionic compounds . element will combine with the atom{(s) of Ionic Constituting | Ratio another element to form a chemical compound. Compound Elements by The valency of the atom of an element can be Mass thought of as hands or arms of that atom. Calcium oxide = Calcium and Human beings have two arms and an oxygen 5:2 octopus has eight. Ifone octopus has to catch Magnesium Magnesium hold of a few people in such a manner that all the eight arms of the octopus and both arms sulphide and sulphur 3:4 . of all the humans are locked, how many Sodium Sodium humans do you think the octopus can hold? chloride and chlorine 23:35.5 Represent the octopus with © and humans with H. Can you write a formula for this we . combination? Do you get OI,as the formula? 3.4 Writing Chemical Formulae The subscript 4 indicates the number of The chemical formula of a compound is a humans held by the octopus. symbolic representation of its composition. The The valencies of some common ions are chemical formulae of different compounds can given in Table 3.6. We will learn more about be written easily. For this exercise, we need to valency in the next chapter. Table 3.6: Names and symbols of some ions Vale- Name of Symbol Non- Symbol Polyatomic Symbol ney ion metallic ions element 1. Sodium Na’ Hydrogen H- Ammonium NH: Potassium K: Hydride HW Hydroxide OH Silver Ag Chloride cr Nitrate NO, Copper (I)* Cur Bromide Br Hydrogen lodide I- carbonate HCO; 2. Magnesium Mg?* Oxide oO Carbonate CO," Calcium Ca” Sulphide Ss? Sulphite so Zine zn?* Sulphate so,” Iron (II)* Fe?* Copper (I]* Cu** 3. Aluminium Al* Nitride N* Phosphate PO,” Iron (IID* Fe* “Some clements show more than one valency. A Roman mumeral shows their valency in a bracket, 32 Sewence Reprint 2025-26

[Page 8]
ATOMS AND MOLECULES 33 3. Formula of carbon tetrachloride For magnesium chloride, we write the symbol of cation (Mg 2+) first followed by the symbol of anion (Cl-). Then their charges are criss-crossed to get the formula. 4. Formula of magnesium chloride Formula : MgCl2 Thus, in magnesium chloride, ther e are two chloride ions (Cl -) for each magnesium ion (Mg2+). The positive and negative charges must balance each other and the overall structure must be neutral. Note that in the formula, the charges on the ions are not indicated. Some more examples (a) Formula for aluminium oxide: Formula : Al2O3 (b) Formula for calcium oxide: Here, the valencies of the two elements are the same. You may arrive at the formula Ca2O2. But we simplify the formula as CaO. The rules that you have to follow while writing a chemical formula are as follows: • the valencies or charges on the ion must balance. • when a compound consists of a metal and a non-metal, the name or symbol of the metal is written first. For example: calcium oxide (CaO), sodium chloride (NaCl), iron sulphide (FeS), copper oxide (CuO), etc., where oxygen, chlorine, sulphur are non- metals and are written on the right, whereas calcium, sodium, iron and copper are metals, and are written on the left. • in compounds formed with polyatomic ions, the number of ions present in the compound is indicated by enclosing the formula of ion in a bracket and writing the number of ions outside the bracket. For example, Mg (OH)2. In case the number of polyatomic ion is one, the bracket is not required. For example, NaOH. 3.4.1 FORMULAE OF SIMPLE COMPOUNDS The simplest compounds, which are made up of two different elements are called binary compounds. Valencies of some ions are given in T able 3.6. Y ou can use these to write formulae for compounds. While writing the chemical formulae for compounds, we write the constituent elements and their valencies as shown below. Then we must crossover the valencies of the combining atoms. Examples 1. Formula of hydrogen chloride Formula of the compound would be HCl. 2. Formula of hydrogen sulphide Reprint 2025-26
The rules that you have to follow while writing 3. Formula of carbon tetrachloride a chemical formula are as follows: e the valencies or charges on the ion Symbol C Cl must balance. . e = when a compound consists of a metal and Valency DX 1 a non-metal, the name or symbol of the ° metal is written first. For example: calcium Formula : CCl, oxide (CaQ)., sodium chloride (NaCl). iron sulphide (FeS). copper oxide (CuQ), etc.. where oxygen. chlorine, sulphur are non- For magnesium chloride, we write the metals and are written on the right. symbol of cation (Mg”) first followed by the whereas calcium, sodium, iron and symbol of anion (Cl). Then their charges are copper are metals, and are written on hice crossed to get the formula. the left. 7 e = incompounds formed with polyatomic ions, 4. Formula of magnesium chloride the number of ions present in the compound is indicated by enclosing the Syinbol Mg Cl formula of ion ina bracket and writing the x number of ions outside the bracket. For Charge 2+ l- example, Mg (OH),. In case the number of . polyatomic ion is one, the bracket is not Formula : MgCl, required. For example, NaOH. 3.4.1 FORMULAE OF SIMPLE COMPOUNDS Thus, in magnesium chloride, there are two chloride ions (Cl) for each magnesium The simplest compounds, which are made up ion (Mg”). The positive and negative charges of two different elements are called binary must balance each other and the overall compounds. Valencies of some ions are given structure must be neutral. Note that in the in Table 3.6. You can use these to write | . “ . formulae for compounds. formula, the charges on the ions are While writing the chemical formulae for [0t indicated. compounds, we write the constituent elements and their valencies as shown below. Then we — Some more examples must crossover the valencies of the (a) Formula for aluminium oxide: combining atoms. Symbol al ) Examples x Charge 3+ 2- 1, Formula of hydrogen chloride Symbol H cl Formula : ALO. Valency OX 1 (b) Formula for calcium oxide: Formula of the compound would be HCL Symbol Ca fe) 2. Formula of hydrogen sulphide x : Charge 2+ 2- Symbol H S$ x Here, the valencies of the two elements Valency 1 2 are the same. You may arrive at the formula Formula : H,S Ca,O,. But we simplify the formula as CaO. Arous ann Motions 33 Reprint 2025-26 :

[Page 9]
SCIENCE34 3434 3434 2. Write down the names of compounds represented by the following formulae: (i) Al2(SO4)3 (ii) CaCl2 (iii) K2SO4 (iv) KNO3 (v) CaCO3. 3. What is meant by the term chemical formula? 4. How many atoms are present in a (i) H2S molecule and (ii) PO4 3– ion? 3.5 Molecular Mass In section 3.2.2 we discussed the concept of atomic mass. This concept can be extended to calculate molecular masses. The molecular mass of a substance is the sum of the atomic masses of all the atoms in a molecule of the substance. It is therefore the relative mass of a molecule expressed in atomic mass units (u). Example 3.1 Example 3.1 Example 3.1 Example 3.1 Example 3.1 (a) C alculate the relative molecular mass of water (H 2O). (b) Calculate the molecular mass of HNO3. Solution: Solution:Solution:Solution:Solution: (a) Atomic mass of hydrogen = 1u, oxygen = 16 u So the molecular mass of water, which contains two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen is = 2 ´ 1+ 1´16 = 18 u (b) The molecular mass of HNO 3 = the atomic mass of H + the atomic mass of N+ 3 ´ the atomic mass of O = 1 + 14 + 48 = 63 u 3.5.1 FORMULA UNIT MASS The formula unit mass of a substance is a sum of the atomic masses of all atoms in a formula unit of a compound. F ormula unit mass is calculated in the same manner as we calculate the molecular mass. The only difference is that (c) Formula of sodium nitrate: Formula : NaNO3 (d) Formula of calcium hydroxide: Formula : Ca(OH)2 Note that the formula of calcium hydroxide is Ca(OH)2 and not CaOH2. We use brackets when we have two or more of the same ions in the formula. Here, the bracket around OH with a subscript 2 indicates that there are two hydroxyl (OH) groups joined to one calcium atom. In other words, there are two atoms each of oxygen and hydrogen in calcium hydroxide. (e) Formula of sodium carbonate: Formula : Na2CO3 In the above example, brackets are not needed if there is only one ion present. (f) Formula of ammonium sulphate: Formula : (NH4)2SO4 Q uestions 1. Write down the formulae of (i) sodium oxide (ii) aluminium chloride (iii) sodium sulphide (iv) magnesium hydroxide Reprint 2025-26
¢) Formula of sodium nitrate: . J) 2. Write down the names of Symbol/ N: xo compounds represented by the Formula a _* following formulae: x fi) AL{SO.}, Charge 1+ 1- fi) CaCl, Fortnula : NaNO, (iii) K,SO, fii) KNO, (d) Fortnula of calcium hydroxide: i} Caco. 3. What is meant bv the term Symbol > ; : symnbot/ Ca OH chemical formula? x 1. How many atoms are present in a Charge 94 1- f) TLS molecule and Formula : Ca(OH), (ii) = PO, ior’? Note that the formula of caleium hydroxide is Ca(OH), and not CaQH,,. We use 3.5 Molecular Mass brackets when we have two or more of the In section 3.2.2 we discussed the concept of same ions in the formula. Here, the bracket atornic mass. This concept can be extended to around OH with a subscript 2 indicates that) caleulate molecular masses. The molecular there are two hydroxyl (OH) groups joined to mass ofa substance is the sum of the atomic one calcium atom, In other words, there are asses of all the atoms in a molecule of the two atoms each of oxygen and hydrogen in substance. It is therefore the relative tnass of calcium hydroxide. a molecule expressed in atomic mass units (ti). (e) Fortnula of sedium carbonate: TFT Example 3.1 (a) Calculate the relative prinbol/ Na CO, molecular mass of water (H,O). ormula x (b) Calculate the molecular mass of Charge 1+ 2- HNO,, Formula : Na,CO, Solution: In the above example, brackets are not needed (a) Atomic mass of hydrogen = lu, if there is only one ion present. oxygen = 16u So the molecular mass of water, which () Formula of ammonium sulphate: contains two atoms of hydrogen and one Formula NH, so, atom of oxygen is = 2x 1+ 1x16 = 18u Charge 14 2. (b) The molecular mass of HNO, = the FR la: (NH).SO atomic mass of H + the atomic mass of ormula : (NH,),SO, N+3x the atomic mass of O =1+14+48=63u j} || Westions 3.5.1 FORMULA UNIT MASS | I. wie down the lormulie of The formula unit mass ofa substance is a surn i" FUT ONTG ; loride of the atornic masses of all ators in a formula | | fit a vhuineulphide unit of a compound, Formula unit mass is oe (iii) sodium su pric ‘ dl calculated in the same manner as we calculate fi} magnesium hydroxide the molecular mass. The only difference is that 34 Some Reprint 2025-26

[Page 10]
ATOMS AND MOLECULES 35 What you have learnt • During a chemical reaction, the sum of the masses of the reactants and products remains unchanged. This is known as the Law of Conservation of Mass. • In a pure chemical compound, elements are always present in a definite proportion by mass. This is known as the Law of Definite Proportions. • An atom is the smallest particle of the element that cannot usually exist independently and retain all its chemical properties. • A molecule is the smallest particle of an element or a compound capable of independent existence under ordinary conditions. It shows all the properties of the substance. • A chemical formula of a compound shows its constituent elements and the number of atoms of each combining element. • Clusters of atoms that act as an ion are called polyatomic ions. They carry a fixed charge on them. • The chemical formula of a molecular compound is determined by the valency of each element. • In ionic compounds, the charge on each ion is used to determine the chemical formula of the compound. we use the word formula unit for those substances whose constituent particles are ions. For example, sodium chloride as discussed above, has a formula unit NaCl. Its formula unit mass can be calculated as– 1 × 23 + 1 × 35.5 = 58.5 u Example 3.2 Calculate the formula unit mass of CaCl2. Solution: Atomic mass of Ca + (2 × atomic mass of Cl) = 40 + 2 × 35.5 = 40 + 71 = 111 u Q uestions 1. Calculate the molecular masses of H2, O 2, Cl 2, CO 2, CH 4, C 2H6, C2H4, NH3, CH3OH. 2. Calculate the for mula unit masses of ZnO, Na2O, K2CO3, given atomic masses of Zn = 65 u, Na = 23 u, K = 39 u, C = 12 u, and O = 16 u. Reprint 2025-26
we use the word formula unit for those uestious substances whose constituent particles are (" i , ions. For example. sodium chloride as | | 2. Calculate the molecular masses discussed above, has a formula unit NaCl. Its of H, O, Cl, CO, CH. CHL, formula unit mass can be calculated as- CHL NH CH OH. : 1x 23+1%*35.5=58.5u | 2 Calculate the formula unit a | masses of Z2O. Na O. KCO., Example 3.2 Calculate the formula unit U given atomic masses of Zt — 65.11, mass of CaCl. Na- 28u, 8 -89u, C= 124, Solution: and O- 16. Atomic mass of Ca + (2 x atomic mass of Cl) =404+2x« 35.5=40+71=11lu What . IE you have > RG BRS Ay pe ae learnt —_ . ° During a chemical reaction, the sum of the masses of the reactants and products remains unchanged. This is known as the Law of Conservation of Mass. ° In a pure chemical compound, clements are always present in a definite proportion by mass. This is known as the Law of Definite Proportions. ° An atom is the smallest particle of the element that cannot usually exist independently and retain all its chemical properties. ° A molecule is the smallest particle of an element or a compound capable of independent existence under ordinary conditions. It shows all the properties of the substance. ° A chemical formula of a compound shows its constituent elements and the number of atoms of each combining element. ° Clusters of atoms that act as an ion are called polyatomic ions. They carry a fixed charge on them. ° The chemical formula of a molecular compound is determined by the valency of cach element. ° In ionic compounds, the charge on cach ion is used to determine the chemical formula of the compound. Arous ann Motions 35 Reprint 2025-26

[Page 11]
SCIENCE36 Group Activity Play a game for writing formulae. Example1 : Make placards with symbols and valencies of the elements separately. Each student should hold two placards, one with the symbol in the right hand and the other with the valency in the left hand. Keeping the symbols in place, students should criss-cross their valencies to form the formula of a compound. Exercises 1. A 0.24 g sample of compound of oxygen and boron was found by analysis to contain 0.096 g of boron and 0.144 g of oxygen. Calculate the percentage composition of the compound by weight. 2. When 3.0 g of carbon is burnt in 8.00 g oxygen, 11.00 g of carbon dioxide is produced. What mass of carbon dioxide will be formed when 3.00 g of carbon is burnt in 50.00 g of oxygen? Which law of chemical combination will govern your answer? 3. What are polyatomic ions? Give examples. 4. Write the chemical for mulae of the following. (a) Magnesium chloride (b) Calcium oxide (c) Copper nitrate (d) Aluminium chloride (e) Calcium carbonate. 5. Give the names of the elements present in the following compounds. (a) Quick lime (b) Hydrogen bromide (c) Baking powder (d) Potassium sulphate. 6. Calculate the molar mass of the following substances. (a) Ethyne, C 2H2 (b) Sulphur molecule, S8 (c) Phosphorus molecule, P 4 (Atomic mass of phosphorus = 31) (d) Hydrochloric acid, HCl (e) Nitric acid, HNO 3 Reprint 2025-26
| ____)s Exercises _? 1. AOQ.24 g sample of compound of oxygen and boron was found T. by analysis to contain 0.096 g of boron and 0.144 g of oxygen. | — Caleulate the percentage composition of the compound by ay weight. Sd 2. When 3.0 g of carbon is burnt in 8.00 g oxygen, 11.00 g of carbon dioxide is produced. What mass of carbon dioxide will be formed when 3.00 g of carbon is burnt in 50.00 g of oxygen? Which law of chemical combination will govern your answer? 3. What are polyatomic ions? Give examples. 4. Write the chemical formulae of the following. (a) Magnesium chloride (b) Calcium oxide (ec) Copper nitrate (d) Aluminium chloride (ce) Caleium carbonate. 5. Give the names of the elements present in the following compounds. (a) Quick lime (b) Hydrogen bromide (ce) Baking powder (d) Potassium sulphate. 6. Calculate the molar mass of the following substances. (a) Ethyne, C,H, (b) Sulphur molecule, S, (c) Phosphorus molecule, P, (Atomic mass of phosphorus = 31) (d) Hydrochloric acid, HCl (ec) Nitric acid, HNO, [) Group Activity Ps ; RK Play a game for writing formulac. Sick N Example! : Make placards with symbols and valencies of the ve eS. elements separately. Each student should hold two \ SRS placards, one with the symbol in the right hand and Wee meee the other with the valency in the left hand. Keeping the symbols in place, students should criss-cross their valencies to form the formula of a compound. 36 Sewxer, : Reprint 2025-26

[Page 12]
ATOMS AND MOLECULES 37 3737 3737 Formula for sodium sulphate: 2 sodium ions can be fixed on one sulphate ion. Hence, the formula will be: Na 2SO4 Do it yourself : Now, write the formula of sodium phosphate. Example 2 :Example 2 :Example 2 :Example 2 :Example 2 : A low cost model for writing formulae: Take empty blister packs of medicines. Cut them in gr oups, according to the valency of the element, as shown in the figure. Now, you can make formulae by fixing one type of ion into other . For example:For example:For example:For example:For example: Na+ SO 4 2- PO 4 3- Reprint 2025-26
Example 2 : A low cost model for writing formulae: Take empty blister packs of medicines. Cut them in groups, according to the valency of the clement, as shown in the figure. Now, you can make formulae by fixing one type of ion into other. For example: Na* SO,’ PO, —JS WL —FLF UL —JS LILI LU Formula for sodium sulphate: 2 sodium ions can be fixed on one sulphate ion. Hence, the formula will be: Na,SO, Do it yourself : Now, write the formula of sodium phosphate. Aros ano Moreccs 37 Reprint 2025-26