[Page 1]
SCIENCE140 We know that all living organisms need food. Food supplies proteins, carbohydrates, fats, vitamins and minerals, all of which we require for body development, gr owth and health. Both plants and animals ar e major sources of food for us. W e obtain most of this food from agriculture and animal husbandry. We r ead in newspapers that ef forts ar e always being made to impr ove pr oduction from agriculture and animal husbandry. Why is this necessary? Why we cannot make do with the current levels of production? India is a very populous country. Our population is mor e than one billion people, and it is still growing. As food for this growing population, we will soon need mor e than a quarter of a billion tonnes of grain every year. This can be done by far ming on more land. But India is already intensively cultivated. As a result, we do not have any major scope for increasing the area of land under cultivation. Therefore, it is necessary to incr ease our production ef ficiency for both cr ops and livestock. Efforts to meet the food demand by incr easing food production have led to some successes so far . We have had the gr een revolution, which contributed to incr eased food-grain production. We have also had the white revolution, which has led to better and more efficient use as well as availability of milk. However, these revolutions mean that our natural resources are getting used more intensively. As a result, there are more chances of causing damage to our natural resources to the point of destroying their balance completely. Therefore, it is important that we should increase food production without degrading our environment and disturbing the balances maintaining it. Hence, there is a need for sustainable practices in agriculture and animal husbandry. Also, simply increasing grain production for storage in warehouses cannot solve the problem of malnutrition and hunger . People should have money to purchase food. Food security depends on both availability of food and access to it. The majority of our population depends on agriculture for their livelihood. Increasing the incomes of people working in agriculture is therefore necessary to combat the pr oblem of hunger . Scientific management practices should be undertaken to obtain high yields from farms. For sustained livelihood, one should undertake mixed farming, intercropping, and integrated farming practices, for example, combine agriculture with livestock/poultry/fisheries/ bee-keeping. The question thus becomes – how do we increase the yields of crops and livestock? 12.1 Improvement in Crop Yields Cereals such as wheat, rice, maize, millets and sorghum provide us carbohydrate for energy requirement. Pulses like gram ( chana), pea (matar), black gram (urad), green gram (moong), pigeon pea (arhar), lentil (masoor), provide us with protein. And oil seeds including soyabean, ground nut, sesame, castor, mustard, linseed and sunflower provide us with necessary fats (Fig. 12.1). Vegetables, spices and fruits pr ovide a range of vitamins and minerals in addition to small amounts of proteins, carbohydrates and fats. In addition to these food crops, fodder crops like berseem, oats or sudan grass are raised as food for the livestock. 12 I II IIMPROVEMENTMPROVEMENTMPROVEMENTMPROVEMENTMPROVEMENT IN ININ ININ F F F F FOOD OODOOD OODOOD R R R R RESOURCESESOURCESESOURCESESOURCESESOURCES C hapter Reprint 2025-26
ESE] Ade +, Cr 12 eset apter ide IMPROVEMENT IN Foop RESOURCES We know that all living organisms need food. — disturbing the balances maintaining it. Hence. Food supplies proteins, carbohydrates, fats. — there is a need for sustainable practices in vitamins and minerals, all of which we require agriculture and animal husbandry. for body development, growth and health. Also, simply increasing grain production Both plants and animals are major sources — for storage in warehouses cannot solve the of food for us. We obtain most of this food — problem of malnutrition and hunger. People from agriculture and animal husbandry. should have money to purchase food. Food We read in newspapers that efforts are security depends on both availability of food always being made to improve production and access to it. The majority of our from agriculture and animal husbandry. Why — population depends on agriculture for their is this necessary? Why we cannot make do _ livelihood. Increasing the incomes of people with the current levels of production? working in agriculture is therefore necessary India is a very populous country. Our — to combat the problem of hunger. Scientific population is more than one billion people. © management practices should be undertaken and it is still growing. As food for this growing to obtain high yields from farms. For population, we will soon need more than a — sustained livelihood, one should undertake quarter of a billion tonnes of grain every year. — mixed farming. intercropping, and integrated This can be done by farming on more land. — farming practices, for example, combine But India is already intensively cultivated. As agriculture with livestock/poultry/fisheries/ a result, we do not have any major scope for — bee-keeping. increasing the area of land under cultivation. The question thus becomes - how do we Therefore, it is necessary to increase our — increase the yields of crops and livestock’? production efficiency for both crops and livestock. 12.1 Improvement in Crop Yields Efforts to meet the food demand by increasing food production have led to some — Cereals such as wheat, rice. maize, millets and successes so far. We have had the green — sorghum provide us carbohydrate for energy revolution, which contributed to increased = requirement. Pulses like gram (chana), pea food-grain production. We have also had the — (mataz), black gram (urad), green gram (moong), white revolution, which has led to better and pigeon pea (arhay), lentil (masoos, provide us with more efficient use as well as availability of milk. — protein. And oil seeds including soyabean, However, these revolutions mean that our — ground nut, sesame, castor, mustard, linseed and natural resources are getting used more — sunflower provide us with necessary fats (Fig. intensively. As a result, there are more 12.1). Vegetables. spices and fruits provide a chances of causing damage to our natural — range of vitamins and minerals in addition to resources to the point of destroying their — small amounts of proteins, carbohydrates and balance completely. Therefore, it is important fats. In addition to these food crops, fodder crops that we should increase food production — like berseem, oats or sudan grass are raised as without degrading our environment and food for the livestock. Reprint 2025-26

[Page 2]
IMPROVEMENT IN FOOD RESOURCES 141 the kharif season from the month of June to October, and some of the crops are grown in the winter season, called the rabi season from November to April. Paddy, soyabean, pigeon pea, maize, cotton, gr een gram and black gram are kharif crops, wher eas wheat, gram, peas, mustard, linseed are rabi crops. In India ther e has been a four times increase in the production of food grains from 1952 to 2010 with only 25% increase in the cultivable land area. How has this incr ease in production been achieved? If we think of the practices involved in farming, we can see that we can divide it into thr ee stages. The first is the choice of seeds for planting. The second is the nurturing of the cr op plants. The third is the protection of the growing and harvested crops from loss. Thus, the major groups of activities for improving crop yields can be classified as: • Crop variety improvement • Crop production improvement • Crop protection management. 12.1.1CROP VARIETY IMPROVEMENT This approach depends on finding a crop variety that can give a good yield. Varieties or strains of crops can be selected by breeding for various useful characteristics such as disease r esistance, r esponse to fertilisers, product quality and high yields. One way of incorporating desirable characters into crop varieties is by hybridisation. Hybridisation refers to cr ossing between genetically dissimilar plants. This cr ossing may be intervarietal (between dif ferent varieties), interspecific (between two different species of the same genus) or inter generic (between different genera). Another way of impr oving the crop is by introducing a gene that would provide the desir ed characteristic. This results in genetically modified crops. For new varieties of crops to be accepted, it is necessary that the variety produces high yields under dif ferent conditions that ar e found in different areas. Farmers would need to be provided with good quality seeds of a particular variety, that is, the seeds should all Fig. 12.1: Different types of crops uestion 1. What do we get fr om cer eals, pulses, fruits and vegetables? Different crops require different climatic conditions, temperature and photoperiods for their growth and completion of their life cycle. Photoperiods are related to the duration of sunlight. Growth of plants and flowering are dependent on sunlight. As we all know, plants manufacture their food in sunlight by the process of photosynthesis. There are some crops, which are grown in rainy season, called Q Reprint 2025-26
iii | mic, . the Kharifseason from the month of June to j i. if BB og) : ry et October, and some of the crops are grown in {, | pS ‘A; sees 3, the winter season. called the rab/season from iB 3 SS SON, , See *s November to April. Paddy, soyabean, pigeon t | : = TAY ry (7 pea, maize, cotton, green gram and black .B i AOS foal 2 gram are Kharifcrops, whereas wheat, gram, Ps | ! ewe - peas, mustard, linseed are rabi crops. In India there has been a four times ep eta MA increase in the production of food grains from 5 ‘ Ge ¢ R at a - . 1952 to 2010 with only 25% increase in the it NN uy} a y 4s cultivable land area. How has this increase AME Bi ne 1a \ 3 4 - : y | in production been achieved’? If we think of ay ¥ a ES way fe cee the practices involved in farming, we can see 4 a : « is a" i that we can divide it into three stages. The ie \ : “Li first is the choice of seeds for planting. The ifiass* . A second is the nurturing of the crop plants. hy ee . The third is the protection of the growing and aE harvested crops from loss. Thus, the major groups of activities for improving crop yields mo a can be classified as: T ¢ Crop variety improvement ‘ | an e Crop production improvement & 1 | e Crop protection management. oy yy 12.1.1 Crop VARIETY IMPROVEMENT | | | ‘ This approach depends on finding a crop ee _ fg | variety that can give a good yield. Varieties or N . a : strains of crops can be selected by breeding _ > = RN for various useful characteristics such as disease resistance, response to fertilisers, Fig. 12.1: Different types of crops product quality and high yields. One way of incorporating desirable characters into crop \ westi varieties is by hybridisation. Hybridisation ff)ue SUON refers to crossing between genetically 1. What do we get tron cercals. dissimilar plants. This crossing may be | pulses, truits and vegetables? intervarietal (between different varieties), \ interspecific (between two different species of the same genus) or intergeneric (between <) different genera). Another way of improving Different crops require different climatic — the crop is by introducing a gene that would conditions, temperature and photoperiods for — provide the desired characteristic. This their growth and completion of their life cycle. results in genetically modified crops. Photoperiods are related to the duration of For new varieties of crops to be accepted, sunlight. Growth of plants and flowering are it is necessary that the variety produces high dependent on sunlight. As we all know, plants — yields under different conditions that are manufacture their food in sunlight by the — found in different areas. Farmers would need process of photosynthesis. There are some — to be provided with good quality seeds of a crops, which are grown in rainy season, called particular variety, that is, the seeds should all Isproveseat i Foop Reset ices 41 Reprint 2025-26 :

[Page 3]
SCIENCE142 be of the same variety and germinate under the same conditions. Cultivation practices and crop yield are related to weather, soil quality and availability of water. Since weather conditions such as dr ought and flood situations ar e unpredictable, varieties that can be grown in diverse climatic conditions ar e useful. Similarly, varieties tolerant to high soil salinity have been developed. Some of the factors for which variety improvement is done are: • Higher yield: T o increase the productivity of the crop per acr e. • Impr oved quality: Quality considerations of crop products vary from crop to cr op. Baking quality is important in wheat, protein quality in pulses, oil quality in oilseeds and preserving quality in fruits and vegetables. • Biotic and abiotic r esistance: Cr ops production can go down due to biotic (diseases, insects and nematodes) and abiotic (dr ought, salinity, water logging, heat, cold and frost) stresses under dif ferent situations. V arieties resistant to these stresses can improve crop production. • Change in maturity duration: The shorter the duration of the crop from sowing to harvesting, the mor e economical is the variety. Such short durations allow far mers to gr ow multiple r ounds of cr ops in a year . Short duration also r educes the cost of crop production. Uniform maturity makes the harvesting pr ocess easy and reduces losses during harvesting. • Wider adaptability: Developing varieties for wider adaptability will help in stabilising the crop production under dif fer ent envir onmental conditions. One variety can then be gr own under dif ferent climatic conditions in different areas. • Desirable agronomic characteristics: Tallness and pr ofuse branching ar e desirable characters for fodder crops. Dwarfness is desired in cereals, so that less nutrients are consumed by these crops. Thus developing varieties of desired agronomic characters help give higher productivity. uestions 1. How do biotic and abiotic factors affect crop production? 2. What are the desirable agronomic characteristics for crop improvements? 12.1.2CROP PRODUCTION MANAGEMENT In India, as in many other agriculture-based countries, farming ranges from small to very large farms. Different farmers thus have more or less land, money and access to information and technologies. In short, it is the money or financial conditions that allow farmers to take up different farming practices and agricultural technologies. There is a correlation between higher inputs and yields. Thus, the farmer’s purchasing capacity for inputs decides cropping system and production practices. Therefore, production practices can be at different levels. They include ‘no cost’ production, ‘low cost’ production and ‘high cost’ production practices. 12.1.2 (i) NUTRIENT MANAGEMENT Just as we need food for development, growth and well-being, plants also require nutrients for growth. Nutrients are supplied to plants by air , water and soil. Ther e ar e several nutrients which are essential for plants. Air supplies carbon and oxygen, hydrogen comes from water, and soil supplies the other thirteen nutrients to plants. Amongst these, some are required in large quantities and are therefore called macro-nutrients. The other nutrients are used by plants in small quantities and are therefore called micro-nutrients (Table 12.1). Q Reprint 2025-26
be of the same variety and germinate under less nutrients are consumed by these the same conditions. crops. Thus developing varieties of Cultivation practices and crop yield are desired agronomic characters help give related to weather, soil quality and availability higher productivity. of water. Since weather conditions such as drought and = flood situations are (" Weshious unpredictable, varieties that can be grown in an diverse climatic conditions are useful. 1. How do biotic and abiotic tactors Similarly, varieties tolerant to high soil salinity | allect crop production? , have been developed. Some of the factors for 2. Whatare the desirable agronomic which variety improvement is done are: | characterises for crop e Higher yield: To increase the w) HPPOVCHICHES: productivity of the crop per acre. e Improved quality: Quality considerations of crop products vary from crop to crop. Baking quality is 12.1.2 CRop PRODUCTION MANAGEMENT important in wheat, protein quality in In India. as in many other agriculture-based pulses, oil quality in oilseeds and - corar . caite s countries, farming ranges from small to very preserving quality in fruits and . . : ; vegetables. large farms. Different farmers thus have more e Biotic and abiotic resistance: Crops °F less land. money and access to information production can go down due to biotic and technologies. In short, it is the money or (diseases, insects and nematodes) and financial conditions that allow farmers to take abiotic (drought, salinity, water up different farming practices and agricultural logging, heat, cold and frost) stresses technologies. There is a correlation between under different situations. Varieties higher inputs and yields. Thus, the farmer's resistant to these stresses can improve purchasing capacity for inputs decides crop production. cropping system and production practices e Change in maturity duration: The pping sys . p pre ” oe . . - Therefore. production practices can be at shorter the duration of the crop from ms . . sowing to harvesting, the more different levels. They include ‘no cost economical is the variety. Such short — Production, ‘low cost’ production and ‘high durations allow farmers to grow — cost production practices. multiple rounds of crops in a year. Short duration also reduces the cost — 12.1.2 (i) NUTRIENT MANAGEMENT of crop production. Uniform maturity . makes the harvesting process easy Just as we need food for development. growth and reduces losses during harvesting. and well-being, plants also require nutrients e Wider adaptability: Developing — for growth. Nutrients are supplied to plants varieties for wider adaptability will by air. water and soil. There are several help in stabilising the crop production nutrients which are essential for plants. Air under different environmental supplies carbon and oxygen. hydrogen comes conditions. One variety can then be from water, and soil supplies the other thirteen grown under different climatic . . ante . ee conditions in different areas. nutrients to plants. Amongst these. some are © Desirable agronomic characteristics: required in large quantities and are therefore Tallness and profuse branching are called macro-nutrients. The other nutrients are desirable characters for fodder crops. used by plants in small quantities and are Dwartness is desired in cereals, so that therefore called micro-nutrients (Table 12.1). 142 Science. Reprint 2025-26

[Page 4]
IMPROVEMENT IN FOOD RESOURCES 143 143143143143 our environment from excessive use of fertilizers. Using biological waste material is also a way of recycling farm waste. Based on the kind of biological material used, manure can be classified as: (i) Compost and vermi-compost: The process in which farm waste material like livestock excreta (cow dung, etc.), vegetable waste, animal r efuse, domestic waste, sewage waste, straw, eradicated weeds etc. is decomposed in pits is known as composting. The compost is rich in organic matter and nutrients. Compost is also pr epar ed by using earthwor ms to hasten the process of decomposition of plant and animal refuse. This is called vermi-compost. (ii) Green manure: Prior to the sowing of the crop seeds, some plants like sun hemp or guar ar e gr own and then mulched by ploughing them into the soil. These green plants thus turn into gr een manure which helps in enriching the soil in nitrogen and phosphorus. FERTILIZERS Fertilizers are commercially produced plant nutrients. Fertilizers supply nitr ogen, phosphorus and potassium. They ar e used to ensur e good vegetative gr owth (leaves, branches and flowers), giving rise to healthy plants. Fertilizers are a factor in the higher yields of high-cost farming. Fertilizers should be applied carefully in terms of proper dose, time, and observing pre- and post-application pr ecautions for their complete utilisation. For example, sometimes fertilizers get washed away due to excessive irrigation and are not fully absorbed by the plants. This excess fertilizer then leads to water pollution. Also, as we have seen in the previous class, continuous use of fertilizers in an area can destroy soil fertility because the organic matter in the soil is not replenished and micro-organisms in the soil are harmed by the fertilizers used. Short-term benefits of using fertilizers and long-term benefits of using Deficiency of these nutrients affects physiological processes in plants including reproduction, growth and susceptibility to diseases. To increase the yield, the soil can be enriched by supplying these nutrients in the form of manure and fertilizers. uestions 1. What ar e macr o-nutrients and why ar e they called macr o- nutrients? 2. How do plants get nutrients? MANURE Manure contains large quantities of organic matter and also supplies small quantities of nutrients to the soil. Manure is prepared by the decomposition of animal excreta and plant waste. Manure helps in enriching soil with nutrients and organic matter and increasing soil fertility. The bulk of or ganic matter in manure helps in improving the soil structure. This involves incr easing the water holding capacity in sandy soils. In clayey soils, the large quantities of organic matter help in drainage and in avoiding water logging. In using manure we use biological waste material, which is advantageous in protecting Table 12.1: Nutrients suppliedTable 12.1: Nutrients suppliedTable 12.1: Nutrients suppliedTable 12.1: Nutrients suppliedTable 12.1: Nutrients supplied by air, water and soilby air, water and soilby air, water and soilby air, water and soilby air, water and soil Air carbon, oxygen Water hydrogen, oxygen Soil (i) Macronutrients: nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, calcium, magnesium, sulphur (ii) Micronutrients: iron, manganese, boron, zinc, copper , molybdenum, chlorine Q Source SourceSource SourceSource NutrientsNutrientsNutrientsNutrientsNutrients Reprint 2025-26
our environment from excessive use of Table 12.1; Nutrients supplied fertilizers. Using biological waste material is by air, water and soil also a way of recycling farm waste. Based on the kind of biological material used, manure Source Nutrients can be classified as: {i) Compost and vermi-compost: The Air carbon, oxygen process in which farm waste material like livestock excreta (cow dung, etc.), Water hydrogen, oxygen vegetable waste, animal refuse, Soil (i) Macronutrients: domestic waste, sewage waste, straw, nitrogen, phosphorus. eradicated weeds etc. is decomposed potassium, caleium, in pits is known as composting. The magnesium, sulphur compost is rich in organic matter and - . nutrients. Compost is also prepared (if) Micronutrients: iron, manganese. boron by using earthworms to hasten the inn Bs : . process of decomposition of plant and zine, copper, : . fire Tie ja palle molybdenum, chlorine animal retuse. This is called vermi-compost. . . {ii) Green manure: Prior to the sowing of Deficiency of these nutrients affects the crop seeds, some plants like sun physiological processes in plants including hemp or guar are grown and then reproduction, growth and susceptibility to mulched by ploughing them into the diseases. To increase the yield. the soil can be soil. These green plants thus turn into enriched by supplying these nutrients in the green manure which helps in form of manure and fertilizers. enriching the soil in nitrogen . and phosphorus. (" westious } 2. What are macro-mutrients aud FERTILIZERS | why are thev called macro- Fertilizers are commercially produced plant nutrients? nutrients. Fertilizers supply nitrogen, | | 2. Howde plants get nutrients? phosphorus and potassium. They are used wo) to ensure good vegetative growth (leaves, branches and flowers), giving rise to healthy plants. Fertilizers are a factor in the higher MANURE yields of high-cost farming. Fertilizers should be applied carefully in Manure contains large quantities of organic terms of proper dose, time, and observing pre- matter and also supplies small quantities of and post-application precautions for ‘their nutrients to the soil. Manure is prepared by complete utilisation. For example, sometimes the decomposition of animal excreta and plant fertilizers get washed away due to excessive waste. Manure helps in enriching soil with irrigation and are not fully absorbed by the nutrients and organic matter and increasing plants. This excess fertilizer then leads to soil fertility. The bulk of organic matter in water pollution. manure helps in improving the soil structure. Also, as we have seen in the previous class, This involves increasing the water holding — continuous use of fertilizers in an area can capacity in sandy soils. In clayey soils. the — destroy soil fertility because the organic large quantities of organic matter help in matter in the soil is not replenished and drainage and in avoiding water logging. micro-organisms in the soil are harmed by the In using manure we use biological waste __ fertilizers used. Short-term benefits of using material, which is advantageous in protecting — fertilizers and long-term benefits of using Isproveseat i Foop Reset ices 143 Reprint 2025-26 :

[Page 5]
SCIENCE144 India has a wide variety of water resources and a highly varied climate. Under such conditions, several different kinds of irrigation systems are adopted to supply water to agricultural lands depending on the kinds of water resources available. These include wells, canals, rivers and tanks. • Wells: There are two types of wells, namely dug wells and tube wells. In a dug well, water is collected from water bearing strata. Tube wells can tap water fr om the deeper strata. Fr om these wells, water is lifted by pumps for irrigation. • Canals: This is usually an elaborate and extensive irrigation system. In this system canals receive water fr om one or more reservoirs or from rivers. The main canal is divided into branch canals having further distributaries to irrigate fields. • River Lift Systems : In ar eas where canal flow is insuf ficient or irregular due to inadequate r eservoir r elease, the lift system is more rational. Water is directly drawn fr om the rivers for supplementing irrigation in ar eas close to rivers. • Tanks: These ar e small storage reservoirs, which intercept and store the run-of f of smaller catchment areas. Fresh initiatives for increasing the water available for agricultur e include rainwater harvesting and watershed management. This involves building small check-dams which lead to an incr ease in gr ound water levels. The check-dams stop the rainwater fr om flowing away and also reduce soil erosion. 12.1.2 (iii) CROPPING PATTERNS Different ways of growing crops can be used to give maximum benefit. Mixed cropping is gr owing two or mor e crops simultaneously on the same piece of land, for example, wheat + gram, or wheat + mustard, or gr oundnut + sunflower . This reduces risk and gives some insurance against failure of one of the crops. manure for maintaining soil fertility have to be considered while aiming for optimum yields in crop production. uestion 1. Compare the use of manure and fertilizers in maintaining soil fertility. Organic farming is a farming system with minimal or no use of chemicals as fertilizers, herbicides, pesticides, etc., and with a maximum input of organic manures, recycled farm-wastes (straw and livestock excreta), use of bio-agents such as cultur e of blue green algae in pr eparation of biofertilizers, neem leaves or turmeric specifically in grain storage as bio-pesticides, with healthy cr opping systems [mixed cropping, inter-cropping and crop rotation as discussed below in 12.1.2.(iii)]. These cropping systems are beneficial in insect, pest and wheat control besides providing nutrients. 12.1.2 (ii) IRRIGATION Most agriculture in India is rain-fed, that is, the success of cr ops in most ar eas is dependent on timely monsoons and sufficient rainfall spread through most of the growing season. Hence, poor monsoons cause cr op failure. Ensuring that the crops get water at the right stages during their growing season can increase the expected yields of any crop. Therefore, many measures are used to bring more and more agricultural land under irrigation. Q More to know Droughts occur because of scarcity or irregular distribution of rains. Drought poses a threat to rain-fed farming areas, where farmers do not use irrigation for crop production and depend only on rain. Light soils have less water retention capacity. In areas with light soils, crops get adversely affected by drought conditions. Scientists have developed some crop varieties which can tolerate drought conditions. Reprint 2025-26
manure for maintaining soil fertility have to India has a wide variety of water resources be considered while aiming for optimum yields — and a highly varied climate. Under such in crop production. conditions, several different kinds of irrigation systems are adopted to supply water to westion agricultural lands depending on the kinds of . water resources available. These include wells, fo) Compare dhe use of manure and canals, rivers and tanks. ferdliaers ino maintaining soil e Wells: There are two types of wells. 4 fertility. namely dug wells and tube wells. In a dug well, water is collected from water Organic farming is a farming system with bearing strata. Tube wells can tap minimal or no use of chemicals as fertilizers, water from the deeper strata. From herbicides, pesticides, ete., and with a these wells, water is lifted by pumps maximum input of organic manures, recycled for irrigation. farm-wastes (straw and livestock excreta), use . Canals: This is usually an elaborate of bio-agents such as culture of blue green and extensive irrigation system. In this algae in preparation of biofertilizers, neem system canals receive water from one leaves or turmeric specifically in grain storage or more reservoirs or from rivers. The as bio-pesticides, with healthy cropping main canal is divided into branch systems [mixed cropping, inter -cropping and canals having further distributaries to crop rotation as discussed below in 12.1.2.{iii)]. irrigate fields. These cropping systems are beneficial in e = River Lift Systems: In areas where insect. pest and wheat control besides canal flow is insufficient or irregular providing nutrients. due to inadequate reservoir release, the lift system is more rational. Water 12.1.2 (ii) IRRIGATION is directly drawn from the rivers for Most agriculture in India is rain-fed, that is, supplementing irrigation in areas the success of crops in most areas is close to rivers. dependent on timely monsoons and sufficient ° Tanks: These are small storage rainfall spread through most of the growing reservoirs, which intercept and store season. Hence, poor monsoons cause crop the run-off of smaller catchment failure. Ensuring that the crops get water at areas. the right stages during their growing season Fresh initiatives for increasing the water can increase the expected yields of any crop. available for agriculture include rainwater Therefore, many measures are used to bring — harvesting and watershed management. This more and more agricultural land involves building small check-dams which under irrigation. lead to an increase in ground water levels. - The check-dams stop the rainwater from Droughts occur because of scarcity or flowing away and also reduce soil erosion. irregular distribution of rains. Drought Pag poses a threat to rain-fed farming 12.1.2 (iii) CROPPING PATTERNS eM areas, where farmers do not use & irrigation for crop production and Different ways of growing crops can be used depend only on rain. Light soils have to give maximum benefit. g less water retention capacity. In areas Mixed cropping is growing two or more kag with light soils, crops get adversely crops simultaneously on the same piece of em affected by drought conditions. land, for example, wheat + gram, or wheat + Peg Scientists have developed some crop mustard, or groundnut + sunflower. This varieties which can tolerate drought reduces risk and gives some insurance conditions. against failure of one of the crops. 144 Science. : Reprint 2025-26

[Page 6]
IMPROVEMENT IN FOOD RESOURCES 145 145145145145 Inter-cropping is growing two or more crops simultaneously on the same field in a definite pattern (Fig.12.2). A few rows of one crop alternate with a few rows of a second crop, for example, soyabean + maize, or finger millet (bajra) + cowpea (lobia). The crops are selected such that their nutrient requirements are dif ferent. This ensures maximum utilisation of the nutrients supplied, and also prevents pests and diseases from spreading to all the plants belonging to one crop in a field. This way , both crops can give better returns. ( gokhroo), Parthenium (gajar ghas), Cyperus rotundus ( motha). They compete for food, space and light. Weeds take up nutrients and reduce the growth of the crop. Therefore, removal of weeds from cultivated fields during the early stages of crop growth is essential for a good harvest. Generally insect pests attack the plants in three ways: (i) they cut the root, stem and leaf, (ii) they suck the cell sap from various parts of the plant, and (iii) they bore into stem and fruits. They thus affect the health of the crop and reduce yields. Diseases in plants are caused by pathogens such as bacteria, fungi and viruses. These pathogens can be present in and transmitted through the soil, water and air. Weeds, insects and diseases can be controlled by various methods. O ne of the most commonly used methods is the use of pesticides, which include herbicides, insecticides and fungicides. These chemicals are sprayed on crop plants or used for treating seeds and soil. H owever, excessive use of these chemicals creates problems, since they can be poisonous to many plant and animal species and cause environmental pollution. Weed control methods also include mechanical removal. Preventive methods such as proper seed bed preparation, timely sowing of crops, intercropping and crop rotation also help in weed control. Some other preventive measures against pests are the use of resistant varieties, and summer ploughing, in which fields are ploughed deep in summers to destroy weeds and pests. uestion 1. Which of the following conditions will give the most benefits? Why? (a) Farmers use high-quality seeds, do not adopt irrigation or use fertilizers. (b) Farmers use ordinary seeds, adopt irrigation and use fertilizer. (c) Farmers use quality seeds, adopt irrigation, use fertilizer and use crop protection measures. Q Fig. 12.2 :Fig. 12.2 :Fig. 12.2 :Fig. 12.2 :Fig. 12.2 : Intercropping The growing of different crops on a piece of land in a pre-planned succession is known as crop rotation. Depending upon the duration, crop rotation is done for dif ferent crop combinations. The availability of moisture and irrigation facilities decide the choice of the crop to be cultivated after one harvest. If crop rotation is done properly then two or three crops can be grown in a year with good harvests. 12.1.3CROP PROTECTION MANAGEMENT Field crops are infested by a large number of weeds, insect pests and diseases. If weeds and pests are not controlled at the appropriate time then they can damage the crops so much that most of the crop is lost. Weeds are unwanted plants in the cultivated field, for example, Xanthium Reprint 2025-26
Intercropping is growing two or more — (gokhroo), Parthenium (gajar ghas), Cyperus crops simultaneously on the same field ina rotundus (motha). They compete for food, definite pattem (Fig.12.2). A few rows ofone — space and light. Weeds take up nutrients and crop alternate with a few rows of a second — reduce the growth of the crop. Therefore, crop, for example, soyabean + maize, or finger removal of weeds from cultivated fields during millet (bajra) + cowpea (lobia). The crops are the carly stages of crop growth is essential for selected such that their) nutrient a good harvest. requirements are different. This ensures Generally insect pests attack the plants maximum utilisation of the nutrients — in three ways: (i) they cut the root, stem and supplied, and also prevents pests and — leaf, (ii) they suck the cell sap from various diseases from spreading to all the plants — parts ofthe plant, and (fii) they bore into stem belonging to one crop in a field. This way. and fruits. They thus affect the health of the both crops can give better returns. crop and reduce yields. - Diseases in plants are caused by OKs DRE SRG. - pathogens such as bacteria, fungi and vinises. es el OS FEQD These pathogens can be present in and OLE CEQ eae) transmitted through the soil, water and air. SS Re Bes Weeds, insects and diseases can be 4 . PN NA Se controlled by various methods. One of the &. 3, & & & & ¢ most commonly used methads is the use of esd fp fo SBS. pesticides, which include herbicides, ABE OPI BAS ORD BOD BF insecticides and fungicides. These chemicals “ Ss & & x g & are sprayed on crop plants or used for treating he a opm RD oe WO seeds and soil. However, excessive use of 4 Dee yee 2 these chemicals creates problems, since they Cp Reraaty EER can be poisonous to many plant and animal OF OOO PER BEN OO, species and cause environmental pollution. KaKeS AN wie Weed control methods also include mechanical removal. Preventive methods Fig. 12.2 : Intercropping such as proper seed bed preparation, timely sowing of crops. intercropping and crop The growing of different crops on a piece rotation also help in weed control. Some other of land ina pre-planned succession is known preventive measures against pests are the use as crop rotation. Depending upon the — ofresistant varieties, and surnmer ploughing, duration, crop rotation is done for different in which fields are ploughed deep in sutnmers crop combinations. The availability of moisture to destroy weeds and pests. and irrigation facilities decide the choice of the crop to be cultivated after one harvest. If crop (" weshion rotation is done properly then two or three i |i ne . . — crops can be grown in a year with 1. Which of the following conditions good harvests. ° | wil give the most benefits? Whve ° (a) Farmers use high quality 12.1.3 CROP PROTECTION MANAGEMENT seeds, do net adopt irrigation or use fertilizers. Field crops are infested by a large number of MK (b}) Farmers use ordinary weeds, insect pests and diseases. If weeds and seeds, adopt irrigation and pests are not controlled at the appropriate use fertilizer. time then they can damage the crops so much (Farmers use quality seeds. that most of the crop is lost. adopt irrigation, use Weeds are unwanted plants in the fertilizer and use crop cultivated field, for example, Xanthium Protecuon mcasures, Ivprovesenr iv Foon ResoeRCES 145 Reprint 2025-26 :

[Page 7]
SCIENCE146 Activity _____________ 12.1 • Visit a nearby garden/agricultural field and make a list of the weeds and the flowers/crops found in the area. Also, make a list of insect pests, if any, infesting the flowers/crops. STORAGE OF GRAINS Storage losses in agricultural produce can be very high. Factors responsible for such losses are biotic— insects, rodents, fungi, mites and bacteria, and abiotic— inappropriate moisture and temperatures in the place of storage. These factors cause degradation in quality, loss in weight, poor germinability, discolouration of produce, all leading to poor marketability. These factors can be controlled by proper treatment and by systematic management of warehouses. Preventive and control measures are used before grains are stored for future use. They include strict cleaning of the produce before storage, proper drying of the produce first in sunlight and then in shade, and fumigation using chemicals that can kill pests. uestions 1. Why should preventive measures and biological control methods be preferred for protecting crops? 2. What factors may be responsible for losses of grains during storage? Activity _____________ 12.2 • Collect grains/seeds of cereals, pulses and oil seeds and gather information about the seasons in which they are sown and harvested. 12.2Animal Husbandry Animal husbandry is the scientific management of animal livestock. It includes various aspects such as feeding, breeding and disease contr ol. Animal-based far ming includes cattle, goat, sheep, poultry and fish farming. As the population increases and as living standar ds incr ease, the demand for milk, eggs and meat is also going up. Also, the gr owing awar eness of the need for humane treatment of livestock has br ought in new limitations in livestock farming. Thus, livestock production also needs to be improved. 12.2.1CATTLE FARMING Cattle husbandry is done for two purposes— milk and draught labour for agricultural work such as tilling, irrigation and carting. Indian cattle belong to two dif ferent species, Bos indicus, cows, and Bos bubalis , buf faloes. Milk-pr oducing females ar e called milch animals (dairy animals), while the ones used for farm labour are called draught animals. Milk production depends, to some extent, on the duration of the lactation period, meaning the period of milk production after Q Table 12.2: Nutritional values of animal products Animal Products Fat Protein Sugar Minerals Water Vitamins Milk (Cow) 3.60 4.00 4.50 0.70 87.20 B1, B2, B12, D, E Egg 12.00 13.00 * 1.00 74.00 B2, D Meat 3.60 21.10 * 1.10 74.20 B2, B12 Fish 2.50 19.00 * 1.30 77.20 Niacin, D, A *Present in very small amounts Per cent (%) Nutrients Reprint 2025-26
Table 12.2: Nutritional values of animal products Animal Per cent (%) Nutrients Products Fat Protein Sugar Minerals Water Vitamins Milk (Cow) 3.60 4.00 4.50 0.70 87.20 BI, B2, B12, D, E Egg 12.00 13.00 * 1.00 74.00 B2,D Meat 3.60 21.10 * 1.10 74.20 B2, B12 Fish 2.50 19.00 * 1.30 77.20 Niacin. D. A *Present in very small amounts Activity 12.1 Activity 12.2 ° Visit a nearby garden/agricultural . Collect grains/seeds of cereals, field and make a hst of the weeds and pulses and oil sceds and gather the Nowers/crops found in the area. information about the seasons in Also, make a list of insect pests, if which they are sown and harvested. any, infesting the flowers/crops. 12.2 Animal Husbandr STORAGE OF GRAINS Y Storage losses in agricultural produce can be Animal husbandry is the scientific very high. Factors responsible for such losses management of animal livestock. It includes are biotic— insects, rodents, fungi. mites and Various aspects such as feeding, breeding and bacteria, and abiotic— inappropriate moisture disease control. Animal-based farming and temperatures in the place of storage. These includes cattle, goat, sheep, poultry and fish factors cause degradation in quality, loss in farming. As the population increases and as weight, poor germinability, discolouration of living standards increase. the demand for produce, all leading to poor marketability. — milk. eggs and meat is also going up. Also, These factors can be controlled by proper the growing awareness of the need for treatment and by systematic management of | humane treatment of livestock has brought warehouses. in new limitations in livestock farming. Thus, Preventive and control measures are used __ livestock production also needs to be improved. before grains are stored for future use. They include strict cleaning of the produce before — 12.2.1 CATTLE FARMING storage, proper drying of the produce first in sunlight and then in shade, and fumigation — Cattle husbandry is done for two purposes— using chemicals that can kill pests. milk and draught labour for agricultural work such as ulling, irrigation and carting. Indian (" uestious cattle belong to two different species, Bos i yi . ; indicus, cows, and Bos bubalis, buffaloes. 1, Why should preventive measures Milk-producing females are called mileh and Diological control micthods be animals (dairy animals), while the ones used preferred tor protccting crops? for farm labour are called draught animals. | | 2 What factors mav be responsible Milk production depends, to some extent, wo) for losses of grains during on the duration of the lactation period, storage? meaning the period of milk production after 146 Sewer, Reprint 2025-26

[Page 8]
IMPROVEMENT IN FOOD RESOURCES 147 the birth of a calf. So, milk production can be increased by increasing the lactation period. Exotic or foreign breeds (for example, Jersey, Brown Swiss) are selected for long lactation periods, while local breeds (for example, Red Sindhi, Sahiwal) show excellent resistance to diseases. The two can be cross-bred to get animals with both the desired qualities. uestion 1. Which method is commonly used for improving cattle breeds and why? Activity _____________ 12.3 • Visit a livestock farm. Note the following: (1) Number of cattle and number of different breeds. (2) The amount of daily milk production from the different breeds. Proper cleaning and shelter facilities for cows and buffaloes are required for humane farming, for the health of the animals and for production of clean milk as well. Animals require regular brushing to remove dirt and loose hair. They should be sheltered under well-ventilated roofed sheds that protect them from rain, heat and cold. The floor of the cattle shed needs to be sloping so as to stay dry and to facilitate cleaning. The food r equirements of dairy animals are of two types: (a) maintenance requirement, which is the food r equired to support the animal to live a healthy life, and (b) milk producing requirement, which is the type of food r equired during the lactation period. Animal feed includes: (a) r oughage, which is largely fibr e, and (b) concentrates, which are low in fibre and contain relatively high levels of pr oteins and other nutrients. Cattle need balanced rations containing all nutrients in proportionate amounts. Besides such nutritious food material, certain feed additives containing micronutrients promote the health and milk output of dairy animals. Cattle suffer from a number of diseases. The diseases, besides causing death, reduce milk pr oduction. A healthy animal feeds regularly and has a nor mal postur e. The parasites of cattle may be both exter nal parasites and internal parasites. The external parasites live on the skin and mainly cause skin diseases. The inter nal parasites like worms, af fect stomach and intestine while flukes damage the liver . Infectious diseases are also caused by bacteria and viruses. Vaccinations ar e given to far m animals against many major viral and bacterial diseases. 12.2.2POULTRY FARMING Poultry farming is undertaken to raise domestic fowl for egg production and chicken meat. Therefore, improved poultry breeds are developed and far med to produce layers for eggs and broilers for meat. The cross-breeding programmes between Indian (indigenous, for example, Aseel) and foreign (exotic, for example, Leghorn) breeds for variety impr ovement ar e focused on to develop new varieties for the following desirable traits— (i) number and quality of chicks; Q Fig. 12.3: Indigenous milch breed of cattle Reprint 2025-26
- Rabeee Bb _ loose hair. They should be sheltered under arr. | well-ventilated roofed sheds that protect them i : tlh i = from rain, heat and cold. The floor of the cattle % ag AT shed needs to be sloping so as to stay dry eae and to facilitate cleaning. te «-" ; a Tog The food requirements of dairy animals = Pe | i iA) tgs “ are of two types: {a) maintenance Cp em egae ip Re yor be | aa "4 requirement, which is the food required to nce cai NOE - support the animal to live a healthy life. and en neces, fa 5 {b) milk producing requirement. which is the ay <a * type of food required during the lactation i ie period. Animal feed includes: (a) roughage, i 4 ': per which is largely fibre, and (b) concentrates, i AY van . which are low in fibre and contain relatively ge & ie ab ar B a high levels of proteins and other nutrients. ee ne 1 Fd na my Cattle need balanced rations containing all . a? ” Bete nutrients in proportionate amounts. Besides such nutritious food material, certain feed Hig. 12.3: Indigenous mileh breed of cattle additives containing micronutrients promote the health and milk output of dairy animals. the birth ofa calf. So, milk production can be Cattle suffer from a number of diseases. increased by increasing the lactation period. — The diseases, besides causing death, reduce Exotic or foreign breeds (for example. Jersey. milk production. A healthy animal feeds Brown Swiss) are selected for long lactation — regularly and has a normal posture. The periods, while local breeds (for example, Red parasites of cattle may be both external Sindhi, Sahiwal) show excellent resistance to parasites and internal parasites. The external diseases. The two can be cross-bred to get parasites live on the skin and mainly cause animals with both the desired qualities. skin diseases. The internal parasites like . worms, affect stomach and intestine while nal vestion flukes damage the liver, Infectious diseases | 1. Which method is conunonly uscd we also caused by bacter fa and viruses. for improving cattle breeds and Vaccinations are given to farm animals | whee against many major viral and bacterial Wy, . diseases. _. 12.2.2 POULTRY FARMING Activity —_______ 12.3 Poultry farming is undertaken to raise e Visit a livestock farm. Note the domestic fowl for egg production and chicken following: meat. Therefore. improved poultry breeds are QQ’) Number of cattle and number of developed and farmed to produce layers for ditterent breeds. ; ; eggs and broilers for meat. (2} The amount of daily milk production The cross-breeding programmes between from the different breeds. - Indian (indigenous, for example, Asee) and Proper cleaning and shelter facilities for foreign (exotic, for example, Leghorn) breeds cows and buffaloes are required for humane for variety improvement are focused on to farming, for the health of the animals and — develop new varieties for the following for production of clean milk as well. Animals — desirable traits— require regular brushing to remove dirt and {i) number and quality of chicks: Inpeoceniat in Foon Reset ices 147 Reprint 2025-26 :

[Page 9]
SCIENCE148 (ii) dwarf broiler parent for commercial chick production; (iii) summer adaptation capacity/ tolerance to high temperature; (iv) low maintenance requirements; (v) reduction in the size of the egg-laying bird with ability to utilise mor e fibrous cheaper diets for mulated using agricultural by-products. The ration (daily food requirement) for broilers is protein rich with adequate fat. The level of vitamins A and K is kept high in the poultry feeds. Poultry fowl suf fer fr om a number of diseases caused by virus, bacteria, fungi, parasites, as well as fr om nutritional deficiencies. These necessitate pr oper cleaning, sanitation, and spraying of disinfectants at regular intervals. Appropriate vaccination can pr event the occurr ence of infectious diseases and reduce loss of poultry during an outbreak of disease. uestions 1. What management practices are common in dairy and poultry farming? 2. What are the differences between broilers and layers and in their management? Activity _____________ 12.4 • Visit a local poultry farm. Observe types of breeds and note the type of ration, housing and lighting facilities given to them. Identify the growers, layers and broilers. 12.2.3FISH PRODUCTION Fish is a cheap source of animal protein for our food. Fish production includes the finned true fish as well as shellfish such as prawns and molluscs. There are two ways of obtaining fish. One is from natural resources, which is called capture fishing. The other way is by fish farming, which is called culture fishery. The water source of the fish can be either seawater or fresh water, such as in rivers and ponds. Fishing can thus be done both by capture and cultur e of fish in marine and freshwater ecosystems. 12.2.3 (i) MARINE FISHERIES India’s marine fishery resources include 7500 km of coastline and the deep seas Fig. 12.4 Aseel Leghorn uestion 1. Discuss the implications of the following statement: “It is inter esting to note that poultry is India’s most ef ficient converter of low fibre food stuf f (which is unfit for human consumption) into highly nutritious animal protein food.” EGG AND BROILER PRODUCTION Broiler chickens ar e fed with vitamin-rich supplementary feed for good growth rate and better feed efficiency. Care is taken to avoid mortality and to maintain feathering and carcass quality. They are produced as broilers and sent to market for meat purposes. For good production of poultry birds, good management practices are important. These include maintenance of temperatur e and hygienic conditions in housing and poultry feed, as well as pr evention and contr ol of diseases and pests. The housing, nutritional and environmental requirements of br oilers are somewhat different from those of egg layers. Q Q Reprint 2025-26
(ii) dwarf broiler parent for commercial The ration (daily food requirement) for broilers chick production: is protein rich with adequate fat. The level of {ii) summer adaptation capacity/ vitamins A and K is kept high in the poultry tolerance to high temperature: feeds. (iv) low maintenance requirements: Poultry fowl suffer from a number of (vy) reduction in the size of the egg-laying — diseases caused by virus, bacteria, fungi, bird with ability to utilise more parasites. as well as from nutritional fibrous cheaper diets formulated deficiencies. These necessitate proper using agricultural by-products. cleaning, sanitation, and spraying of disinfectants at regular intervals. Appropriate vaccination can prevent the occurrence of " ag. ar, G, infectious diseases and reduce loss of poultry is a= \' . during an outbreak of disease. L -) ree A) uestions : | | ¢@. Whatinanagement practices arc ] er > conmnon in dairy and powlay ae imei Y om | farming? Aseel Leghorn — | 2. Whatare the dittercnecs benveen | broflers and lavers and in their Fig. 12.4 managenicnl? westion M ; ae . Activity id 1. Discuss the implications of the following statement: . Visit a local poultry farm. Observe | “Hois intercsding ta note Cat types of breeds and note the type of | poultry is India's most ctticient ration. housing and lighting facilities | converter of low fibre food stutt given to them. Identity the growers, ww) . : an layers and broilers. (whieh is antic for human . consumption) into highly nutvidious aninua protcin food. 12.2.3 FISH PRODUCTION EGG AND BROILER PRODUCTION Fish is a cheap source of animal protein for . our food. Fish production includes the finned Broiler chickens are fed with vitamin-rich true fish as well as shellfish such as prawns supplementary feed for good growth rate and and molluses. There are two ways of obtaining better feed efficiency. Care is taken to avoid fish. One is from natural resources. which is mortality and to maintain feathering and — eatled capture fishing. The other way is by carcass quality. They are produced as broilers fish farming, which is called culture fishery. and sent to market for meat purposes. The water source of the fish can be either For good production of poultry birds, good seawater or fresh water, such as in rivers and management practices are important. These ponds. Fishing can thus be done both by include maintenance of temperature and — capture and culture of fish in marine and hygienic conditions in housing and poultry freshwater ecosystems. feed. as well as prevention and control of diseases and pests. 12.2.3 (i) MARINE FISHERIES The housing. nutritional and environmental requirements of broilers are — India’s marine fishery resources include somewhat different from those of egg layers. 7500 km of coastline and the deep seas 148 Science. : Reprint 2025-26

[Page 10]
IMPROVEMENT IN FOOD RESOURCES 149 beyond it. Popular marine fish varieties include pomphret, mackerel, tuna, sardines, and Bombay duck. Marine fish ar e caught using many kinds of fishing nets from fishing boats. Yields are increased by locating large schools of fish in the open sea using satellites and echo-sounders. Some marine fish of high economic value are also far med in seawater . This includes finned fishes like mullets, bhetki, and pearl spots, shellfish such as prawns (Fig. 12.5), mussels and oysters as well as seaweed. Oysters ar e also cultivated for the pearls they make. Macrobrachium rosenbergii (fresh water) Peneaus monodon (marine) Fig. 12.5 : Fresh water and marine prawns As marine fish stocks get further depleted, the demand for more fish can only be met by such cultur e fisheries, a practice called mariculture. 12.2.3 (ii) INLAND FISHERIES Fresh water resources include canals, ponds, reservoirs and rivers. Brackish water resour ces, where seawater and fr esh water mix together, such as estuaries and lagoons are also important fish r eservoirs. While capture fishing is also done in such inland water bodies, the yield is not high. Most fish production from these resources is thr ough aquaculture. Fish cultur e is sometimes done in combination with a rice crop, so that fish are grown in the water in the paddy field. Mor e intensive fish far ming can be done in composite fish cultur e systems. Both local and imported fish species ar e used in such systems. In such a system, a combination of five or six fish species is used in a single fishpond. These species ar e selected so that they do not compete for food among them having different types of food habits. As a result, the food available in all the parts of the pond is used. As Catlas are sur face feeders, Rohus feed in the middle-zone of the pond, Mrigals and Common Carps are bottom feeders, and Grass Carps feed on the weeds, together these species (Fig. 12.6) can use all the food in the pond without competing with each other. This increases the fish yield from the pond. (a) (b) (c) (d) Fig. 12.6: (a) Catla (b) Silver carp (c) Rohu (d) Grass Carp (e) Mrigal (f) Common Carp (e) (f) One problem with such composite fish culture is that many of these fish breed only during monsoon. Even if fish seed is collected from the wild, it can be mixed with that of other species as well. So, a major problem in fish farming is the lack of availability of good- quality seed. To overcome this problem, ways have now been worked out to breed these fish in ponds using hor monal stimulation. This has ensured the supply of pur e fish seed in desir ed quantities. Reprint 2025-26
beyond it. Popular marine fish varieties In such a system, a combination of five or include pomphret, mackerel. tuna, sardines, six fish species is used in a single fishpond. and Bombay duck. Marine fish are caught These species are selected so that they do using many Kinds of fishing nets from fishing — not compete for food among them having boats. Yields are increased by locating large different types of food habits. As a result, the schools of fish in the open sea using satellites food available in all the parts of the pond is and echo-sounders. used. As Catlas are surface feeders, Rohus Some marine fish of high economic value feed in the middle-zone of the pond, Mrigals are also farmed in seawater. This includes | and Common Carps are bottom feeders, and finned fishes like mullets. bhetki, and pearl Grass Carps feed on the weeds, together these spots, shellfish such as prawns (Fig. 12.5). species (Fig. 12.6) can use all the food in the mussels and oysters as well as seaweed. pond without competing with each other. This Oysters are also cultivated for the pearls increases the fish yield from the pond. they make. ~ {a} oC (b) Macrobrachtum rosenbergit Peneaus monodan Mreshs water} fmarine} {c] (d) As marine fish stocks get further depleted. the demand for more fish can only be met by such culture fisheries, a practice called p ition “ 12.2.3 (ii) INLAND FISHERIES e) Ne “ Fresh water resources include canals, ponds. () reservoirs and rivers. Brackish water resources, where seawater and fresh water Pig. 12.6: (a) Catla (bj Silver carp {c] Rohu (dj) Grass mix together, such as estuaries and lagoons Carp (e} Mrigal (9 Common Carp are also important fish reservoirs. While capture fishing is also done in such inland One problem with such composite fish water bodies, the yield is not high. Most fish — culture is that many of these fish breed only production from these resources is through — during monsoon. Even if fish seed is collected aquaculture. from the wild, it can be mixed with that of Fish culture is sometimes done in — other species as well. So, a major problem in combination with a rice crop, so that fish are fish farming is the lack of availability of good - grown in the water in the paddy field. More — quality seed. To overcome this problem, ways intensive fish farming can be done in — have now been worked out to breed these fish composite fish culture systems. Both local — in ponds using hormonal stimulation. This and imported fish species are used in such — has ensured the supply of pure fish seed in systems. desired quantities. Isproveseat i Foop Reset ices 149 Reprint 2025-26 :

[Page 11]
SCIENCE150 uestions 1. How are fish obtained? 2. What ar e the advantages of composite fish culture? Activity _____________ 12.5 • Visit a fish farm in fish breeding season and note the following: (1) Varieties of fish in fish far m (2) Types of ponds (3) Feed ingredients used (4) Production capacity of the farm If there are no fish farms close to your locality, gather the above information from Internet, by referring books or talking to people who are engaged in fishery. 12.2.4BEE-KEEPING Honey is widely used and ther efore bee- keeping for making honey has become an agricultural enterprise. Since bee-keeping needs low investments, farmers use it as an additional income generating activity. In addition to honey, the beehives are a source of wax which is used in various medicinal preparations. The local varieties of bees used for commercial honey production are Apis cerana indica, commonly known as the Indian bee, A. dorsata, the rock bee and A. florae, the little bee. An Italian bee variety, A. mellifera, has also been brought in to increase yield of honey. This is the variety commonly used for commercial honey production. The Italian bees have high honey collection capacity. They sting somewhat less. They stay in a given beehive for long periods, and breed very well. For commercial honey production, bee farms or apiaries are established. The value or quality of honey depends upon the pasturage, or the flowers available to the bees for nectar and pollen collection. In addition to adequate quantity of pasturage, the kind of flowers available will deter mine the taste of the honey. uestions 1. What ar e the desirable characters of bee varieties suitable for honey production? 2. What is pasturage and how is it related to honey production? Q (a) (b) Fig. 12.7: (a) Arrangement of beehive in an apiary (b) honey extractor Q What you have learnt • There are several nutrients essential for crops. Of these, some are required in large quantities and are known as macro-nutrients whereas rest of the nutrients are required in small quantities and are known as micro-nutrients. • Manure and fertilizers are the main sources of nutrient supply to crops. • Organic farming is a farming system with minimal or no use of chemicals as fertilizers, herbicides, pesticides etc. and Reprint 2025-26
()\ uestions ge | 1 How are tish obtained? met eli F | 2 What arc the advantages ot 2 “Gri i nt . \ composite tish culawe? Seeks y.- * 7° Activity 12.5 See * Visit a fish farm in fish breeding (a) tb) season and note the following: (1} Varieties of fish in fish farm Fig. 12.7. fa} Arrangement of beehive in an apiary (2} Types of ponds tb} honey extractor (3} Feed ingredients used (4) Production capacity of the farm This is the variety commonly used for If there are no fish farms close to your commercial honey production. locality, gather the above information from The Italian bees have high honey collection internet _ DY referring books of talking 10 capacity. They sting somewhat less. They stay People Who are engaged in NSnery- in a given beehive for long periods, and breed very well. For commercial honey production, 12.2.4 BEE-KEEPING bee farms or apiaries are established. Honey is widely used and therefore bee- The value or quality of honey depends keeping for making honey has become an — upon the pasturage, or the flowers available agricultural enterprise. Since bee-keeping — to the bees for nectar and pollen collection. needs low investments, farmers use itas an — In addition to adequate quantity of pasturage, additional income generating activity. In the kind of flowers available will determine addition to honey, the beehives are a source the taste of the honey. of wax which is used in various medicinal preparations. uestions The local varieties of bees used for | , , commercial honey production are Apis cerana | 1 What are the desirable indica, commonly known as the Indian bee. characters of bee varictics A. dorsata, the rock bee and A. florae, the little suitable for honey production? bee. An Italian bee variety. A. mellifera, has \ 2. Whatis pasturage and how is it also been brought in to increase yield of honey. y relied to honey production? (dS What ? & Aig: you have gi" Mi” / learnt — . * There are several nutrients essential for crops. Of these, some are required in large quantities and are known as macro-nutrients whereas rest of the nutrients are required in small quantities and are known as micro-nutrients. ° Manure and fertilizers are the main sources of nutrient supply to crops. ° Organic farming is a farming system with minimal or no use of chemicals as fertilizers, herbicides, pesticides ete. and 150 Science. Reprint 2025-26

[Page 12]
IMPROVEMENT IN FOOD RESOURCES 151 with a maximum input of organic manures, recyled farm wastes, and bio-agents, with healthy cropping systems. • Mixed farming is a system of farming on a particular farm which includes crop production, raising of livestock etc. • Mixed cropping is growing of two or more crops simultaneously on the same piece of land. • Growing two or mor e crops in definite row patterns is known as inter - cropping. • The growing of different crops on a piece of land in pre-planned succession is called crop rotation. • Varietal improvement is r equired for higher yield, good quality, biotic and abiotic resistance, shortening the maturity duration, wider adaptability and desirable agronomic characteristics. • Farm animals r equire pr oper car e and management such as shelter , feeding, breeding and disease control. This is called animal husbandry. • Poultry farming is done to raise domestic fowls. Poultry production includes egg production and broiler production for poultry meat. • To enhance poultry production, cross breeding is done between Indian and exotic breeds for variety improvement. • Fish may be obtained from marine resources as well as inland resources. • To increase production of fish, they can be cultured in marine and inland ecosystems. • Marine fish capture is done by fishing nets guided by echo-sounders and satellites. • Composite fish culture system is commonly used for fish farming. • Bee-keeping is done to get honey and wax. Exercises 1. Explain any one method of crop production which ensures high yield. 2. Why are manure and fertilizers used in fields? 3. What are the advantages of inter -cropping and cr op rotation? 4. What is genetic manipulation? How is it useful in agricultural practices? 5. How do storage grain losses occur? 6. How do good animal husbandry practices benefit farmers? 7. What are the benefits of cattle farming? 8. For increasing production, what is common in poultry, fisheries and bee-keeping? 9. How do you differentiate between capture fishing, mariculture and aquaculture? Reprint 2025-26
with a maximum input of organic manures, recyled farm wastes, and bio-agents, with healthy cropping systems. ° Mixed farming is a system of farming on a particular farm which includes crop production, raising of livestock ete. ° Mixed cropping is growing of two or more crops simultaneously on the same piece of land. ° Growing two or more crops in definite row patterns is known as inter- cropping. ° The growing of different crops on a piece of land in pre-planned succession is called crop rotation. ° Varictal improvement is required for higher yield, good quality, biotic and abiotic resistanee, shortening the maturity duration, wider adaptability and desirable agronomic characteristics. ° Farm animals require proper care and management such as shelter, feeding, breeding and disease control. This is called animal hushandry. ° Poultry farming is done to raise domestic fowls. Poultry production includes egg production and broiler production for poultry meat. ° To enhance poultry production, cross breeding is done between Indian and exotic breeds for variety improvement. ° Fish may be obtained from marine resources as well as inland resources. ° To increase production of fish, they can be cultured in marine and inland ecosystems. ° Marine fish capture is done by fishing nets guided by echo-sounders and satellites. e Composite fish culture system is commonly used for fish farming. ° Bee-keeping is done to get honey and wax. . Exercises C.ti‘C;SC~*”r 1. Explain any one method of crop production which ensures high yield. 2. Why are manure and fertilizers used in fields’? ry i 3. What are the advantages of inter-cropping and crop rotation? ! LS; 4. What is genetic manipulation? How is it useful in agricultural practices? > P 5. How do storage grain losses occur? 7 6. How do good animal hushandry practices benefit farmers? SN 7. What are the benefits of cattle farming? 8. For increasing production, what is common in poultry, fisheries and bee-keeping? 9. How do you differentiate between capture fishing, mariculture and aquaculture? Iaracneaent is Foon Resor wees 151 Reprint 2025-26 :