SCIENCE6 1.4.1 EFFECT OF CHANGE OF TEMPERATURE Activity _____________1.12 • Take about 150 g of ice in a beaker and suspend a laboratory thermometer so that its bulb is in contact with the ice, as in Fig. 1.6. uestions 1. The mass per unit volume of a substance is called density. (density = mass/volume). Arrange the following in order of increasing density – air, exhaust from chimneys, honey, water , chalk, cotton and iron. 2. (a) Tabulate the dif ferences in the characterisitcs of states of matter. (b) Comment upon the following: rigidity, compr essibility, fluidity, filling a gas container , shape, kinetic energy and density. 3. Give reasons (a) A gas fills completely the vessel in which it is kept. (b) A gas exerts pressure on the walls of the container. (c) A wooden table should be called a solid. (d) We can easily move our hand in air but to do the same through a solid block of wood we need a karate expert. 4. Liquids generally have lower density as compar ed to solids. But you must have observed that ice floats on water. Find out why. 1.4 Can Matter Change its State? We all know from our observation that water can exist in three states of matter– • solid, as ice, • liquid, as the familiar water, and • gas, as water vapour. What happens inside the matter during this change of state? What happens to the particles of matter during the change of states? How does this change of state take place? We need answers to these questions, isn’t it? Q (a) (b) Fig. 1.6: (a) Conversion of ice to water, (b) conversion of water to water vapour Reprint 2025-26
(i westions 1.4.1 EeFECT OF CHANGE OF TEMPERATURE | 1 i mass pe r tant volunic of a Activity 1.12 substance is called density. TTT {density - nraiss/voluime). ¢ Take about 150 g of ice in a beaker and | Arrange the tollowing in order of suspend a laboratory thermometer so UJ increasing density - air, exhaust that us bulb is in contact with the ice, from chininevs, honev. water. asin Fig, 1.6. chalk. cotton and iron, 2 fa) Tabulate the ditfercnecs in the charactcrisites of states of niatter. Iron. (bh) Comment upon the following: stand . [ Thermometer rigidity. compressibility. Ont jase p— Glass stirrer Quidit. filling a gas i container, shape, kinctic i] encr)ev and density. —} 3 Give reasons Beaker fa) A gas fills completely the lee vessel in which itis kept. es (bh) A gas exerts pressure on the i Walls of Che container. TS Burner fe) A wooden table should be ’ called a solid. Cs fd) Weean casilv move our hand 7 in-air but to do the same fa) through a solid block of wood we need a karate cxpert. 4. Liquids generally have lowcr | density as comparcd ta solids. Iron: . ; But vou must have observed Chait stand | {. Thermometer ice Moats on water. Find out why. OY [Izs=+ J Glass stirrer 14 Can Matter Change its State? — Beaker We all know from our observation that water wii Water can exist in three states of matter- ‘ = . solid, as ice. a © — hqunid, as the familiar water, and 3 Burner * gas, as water vapour. What happens inside the matter during a this change of state? What happens to the particles of matter during the change of Oo} states? How does this change of state take place? We need answers to these questions, Fig. 1.6: (a) Conversion of ice to water, (b] conversion isn’t it? of water fo water vapour 6 Science. : Reprint 2025 26