MATTER IN O UR S URROUNDING S 3 • If we consider each student as a particle of matter, then in which group the particles held each other with the maximum force? Activity ______________ 1.7 • Take an iron nail, a piece of chalk and a rubber band. • Try breaking them by hammering, cutting or stretching. • In which of the above three substances do you think the particles are held together with greater force? Activity ______________ 1.8 • Take some water in a container , try cutting the surface of water with your fingers. • Were you able to cut the sur face of water? • What could be the reason behind the surface of water remaining together? The above three activities (1.6, 1.7 and 1.8) suggest that particles of matter have force acting between them. This force keeps the particles together. The strength of this force of attraction varies from one kind of matter to another. uestions 1. Which of the following are matter? Chair , air , love, smell, hate, almonds, thought, cold, lemon water, smell of perfume. 2. Give reasons for the following observation: The smell of hot sizzling food reaches you several metres away, but to get the smell from cold food you have to go close. 3. A diver is able to cut through water in a swimming pool. Which property of matter does this observation show? 4. What are the characteristics of the particles of matter? Particles of matter are continuously moving, that is, they possess what we call the kinetic energy. As the temperature rises, particles move faster. So, we can say that with increase in temperature the kinetic energy of the particles also increases. In the above thr ee activities we observe that particles of matter intermix on their own with each other. They do so by getting into the spaces between the particles. This intermixing of particles of two different types of matter on their own is called diffusion. We also observe that on heating, dif fusion becomes faster. Why does this happen? 1.2.3 PARTICLES OF MATTER ATTRACT EACH OTHER Activity ______________ 1.6 • Play this game in the field— make four groups and for m human chains as suggested: • The first group should hold each other from the back and lock arms like Idu-Mishmi dancers (Fig. 1.3). Fig. 1.3 • The second group should hold hands to form a human chain. • The third gr oup should for m a chain by touching each other with only their finger tips. • Now, the fourth gr oup of students should run around and try to break the three human chains one by one into as many small groups as possible. • Which group was the easiest to break? Why? Q Reprint 2025-26
Particles of matter are continuously «If we consider cach student as a moving, that is, they possess what we call particle of matter, then in which group the Kinetic energy. As the temperature rises. the part icles held each other with the particles move faster. So, we can say that with maximum force? increase in temperature the kinetic energy of lo - the particles also increases. Activity 1.7 In the above three activities we observe os - z . that particles of matter intermi their . Take an iron nail, a piece of chalk and at particles o} ma er intermix on their own a rubber band. with each other. They do so by getting into ¢ Try breaking them by hammering, the spaces between the particles, This cutting or stretching. intermixing of particles of two different types . In which of the above three of matter on their own is called diffusion. We substances do you think the particles also observe that on heating, diffusion are held together with greater force? becomes faster. Why does this happen? aan 5 Activity _ 1.8 1.2.3 PARTICLES OF MATTER ATTRACT on seg ee . Take some water in a container, try EACH OTHER cutting the surface of water with your fingers. Activity 1.6 ¢ Were you able to cut the surface of . water? ° Play this game in the field— make four ° What could be the reason behind the groups and form human chains as surface of water remaining together? supeested: on . . The first group should hold each The above three activities (1.6. 1.7 and 1.8) other from the back and lock arms suggest that particles of matter have force like Idu-Mishmi dancers (Fig. 1.3). acting between them. This force keeps the particles together. The strength of this force of attraction varies from one kind of matter to ~~ 0 Oe ‘e 2 another. S § Ms. Bhd eS os als oi we MM , Hestions : ye 7 a . | by ‘ ‘ , ‘ . : pS t | 44 1 Which of the following are ed y fH wo 3 i , syed ThA Tm feat Been ve mMatlter? eer We Sh o Pes a (eras Chair. air. love, smichl. hate aM YE Joe vaste | almonds. thought, cold, lenin ° ww Water, smell of pertiane. rig. 1.3 2. Give reasons for the tollowing observation: ¢ The second group should hold hands Phe smicil of hot sizaling food to form a human chain. reaches vou several metres . The third group should form a chain awa. bat to get the smell from by touching each other with only their cold food vou have to go close. finger ips. OA diver is able ta cut dirough . Now, the fourth group of students Water ina swimming pool. Which should run around and try to break the property of matter docs this three human chains one hy one into “. oy * nc observation show? as many small groups as possible. Vv, the . spetigns nf’ ¢ Which group was the easiest to break? A What cue Fc charac teristics ot Why? the particics of matter? Marten iw Otk Strrotxpixncs 3 Reprint 2025 26