SCIENCE2 • Take out approximately 10 mL of this solution and put it into 90 mL of clear water. • Take out 10 mL of this solution and put it into another 90 mL of clear water. • Keep diluting the solution like this 5 to 8 times. • Is the water still coloured ? 1.2.2 PARTICLES OF MATTER ARE CONTINUOUSLY MOVING Activity Activity Activity Activity Activity 1.3 1.31.3 1.31.3 • Put an unlit incense stick in a corner of your class. How close do you have to go near it so as to get its smell? • Now light the incense stick. What happens? Do you get the smell sitting at a distance? • Record your observations. Activity Activity Activity Activity Activity 1.4 1.41.4 1.41.4 • Take two glasses/beakers filled with water. • Put a dr op of blue or r ed ink slowly and carefully along the sides of the first beaker and honey in the same way in the second beaker. • Leave them undisturbed in your house or in a corner of the class. • Record your observations. • What do you observe immediately after adding the ink drop? • What do you observe immediately after adding a drop of honey? • How many hours or days does it take for the colour of ink to spr ead evenly throughout the water? Activity Activity Activity Activity Activity 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 • Drop a crystal of copper sulphate or potassium permanganate into a glass of hot water and another containing cold water. Do not stir the solution. Allow the crystals to settle at the bottom. • What do you observe just above the solid crystal in the glass? • What happens as time passes? • What does this suggest about the particles of solid and liquid? • Does the rate of mixing change with temperature? Why and how? From the above three activities (1.3, 1.4 and 1.5), we can conclude the following: Fig. 1.2: Estimating how small ar e the particles of matter. With every dilution, though the colour becomes light, it is still visible. This experiment shows that just a few crystals of potassium per manganate can colour a lar ge volume of water (about 1000 L). So we conclude that there must be millions of tiny particles in just one crystal of potassium permanganate, which keep on dividing themselves into smaller and smaller particles. The same activity can be done using 2 mL of Dettol instead of potassium permanganate. The smell can be detected even on repeated dilution. The particles of matter are very small – they are small beyond our imagination!!!! 1.2 Characteristics of Particles of Matter 1.2.1 PARTICLES OF MATTER HAVE SPACE BETWEEN THEM In activities 1.1 and 1.2 we saw that particles of sugar , salt, Dettol, or potassium permanganate got evenly distributed in water. Similarly, when we make tea, cof fee or lemonade (nimbu paani ), particles of one type of matter get into the spaces between particles of the other. This shows that ther e is enough space between particles of matter. Reprint 2025-26
¢ Take out approximately 10 mL of this 1.2.2 PARTICLES OF MATTER ARE solution and put it into 90 m1. of clear water, CONTINLOUSLY MOVING ° Take out 10 mL. of this solution and ut it into another 90 mL of clear water. oe ° Keep diluting the solution like this 5 to Activity TT 4.3 8 times, ° Is the water still coloured ? ° Put an unlit incense stick in a corner of your class. How close do you have to go near it so as to pet its smell’? Fpomt — Fpomb — 10 ml. ° Now light the incense stick. What i ~ happens? Do you get the smell sitting —<f | [ | [" Pr] at a distance? <Q LIP Chie Lie <n ie ey ¢ ~~ Record your observations. vom) fowas, lnm, son) wal Aletivity tg . Take two plasses/beakers filled with Fig. 1.2: Estimating how small are the particles of water, Malte. With every dilution though the colour e Put a drop of blue or red ink slowly becomes light, it is sdll visible. . ye . and carefully along the sides of the first heaker and honey in the same way in This experiment shows that just a few the second beaker. crystals of potassium permanganate can . Leave them undisturbed in your house colour a large volume of water (about or in a corner of the class. 1000 L}. So we conclude that there must be . Record your observations. millions of tiny particles in just one crystal ¢ = What do you observe immediately after of potassium permanganate, which keep adding the ink drop? on dividing themselves into smaller and ¢ What do you observe immediately after smaller particles. adding a drop of honey? The same activity can be done using 2 mL. ¢ How many hours or days does it take of Dettol instead of potassium permanganate. for the colour of ink to spread evenly The smell can be detected even on throughout the water? repeated dilution. they are small beyond our imagination!!! ° Drop a crystal of copper sulphate or 12 Characteristics of Particles of potassium permanganate into a glass of hot water and another containing Matter cold water. Do not stir the solution. Allow the erystals to settle at the 1.2.1 PARTICLES OF MATTER HAVE SPACE bottom. . BETWEEN THEM e What do you observe just above the solid crystal in the glass? In activities 1.1 and 1.2 we saw that particles * What happens as time passes? of sugar, salt, Dettol, or potassium . What does this suggest about the permanganate got evenly distributed in water. particles of solid and. liquid? Similarly, when we make tea. coffee or * Does the rate of mixing change with lemonade (nimbu paani), particles of one type temperature? Why and how? of matter get into the spaces between particles . So . of the other. This shows that there is enough From the above three activities (1.3, 1.4 and space between particles of matter. 1.5), we can conclude the following: 2 Scieack : Reprint 2025 26