SCIENCE8 enclosed in a cylinder? Will the particles come closer? Do you think that increasing or decreasing the pressure can change the state of matter? are some that change directly from solid state to gaseous state and vice versa without changing into the liquid state. Activity _____________1.13 • Take some camphor. Crush it and put it in a china dish. • Put an inverted funnel over the china dish. • Put a cotton plug on the stem of the funnel, as shown in Fig. 1.7. * atmosphere (atm) is a unit of measuring pressure exerted by a gas. The unit of pressure is Pascal (Pa): 1 atmosphere = 1.01 × 105 Pa. The pressure of air in atmosphere is called atmospheric pressure. The atmospheric pressure at sea level is 1 atmosphere, and is taken as the normal atmospheric pressure. Fig. 1.7: Sublimation of camphor Fig. 1.8: By applying pressure, particles of matter can be brought close together Applying pressure and reducing temperature can liquefy gases. Have you hear d of solid carbon dioxide (CO2)? It is stored under high pressure. Solid CO2 gets converted directly into gaseous state on decr ease of pr essure to 1 atmospher e* without coming into liquid state. This is the reason that solid carbon dioxide is also known as dry ice. Thus, we can say that pr essur e and temperature deter mine the state of a substance, whether it will be solid, liquid or gas. • Now, heat slowly and observe. • What do you infer from the above activity? A change of state directly from solid to gas without changing into liquid state is called sublimation and the direct change of gas to solid without changing into liquid is called deposition. 1.4.2 EFFECT OF CHANGE OF PRESSURE We have already learnt that the difference in various states of matter is due to the dif ference in the distances between the constituent particles. What will happen when we start putting pressure and compress a gas Fig. 1.9: Interconversion of the three states of matter Deposition Reprint 2025-26
are some that change directly from solid state enclosed in a cylinder? Will the particles come lo gaseous state and vice versa without — closer? Do you think that increasing or changing into the liquid state. decreasing the pressure can change the state of matter? Activity 1.13 ¢ ‘Take some camphor. Crush it and put Mieton . Piston Piston it in a china dish. vlinder (vlinder Cyhnder . Put an inverted funnel over the china dish. . Put a cotton plug on the stem of the funnel, as shown in Fig. 1.7. C f —!, ; ‘otton phi | Ca) les Inverted fonnel Camphor mo Camphor , . apours \ f 0 woteitied Pig. 1.8: By applying pressure, particles of matter 4 \ can be brought close together / . \ . y Applying pressure and reducing > See ag China dist temperature van liquefy gases. a Have you heard of solid carbon dioxide | ca (CO,)? It is stored under high pressure. Solid JY , = Burner CO, gets converted directly into gaseous state fi © \ on decrease of pressure to 1 atmosphere“ oe without coming into liquid state. This is the Fig. 1.7: Sublimation of camphor reason that solid carbon dioxide is also known . as dry ice. ° Now, heat slowly and observe. Thus. we can say that pressure and . What do you infer from the above activity? temperature determine the state of a . substance, whether it will be solid. liquid Achange of state directly from solid to gas BAS. without changing into liquid state is called sublimation and the direct change of gas to Liquid ‘ solid without changing into liquid is called S . <n, deposition. S/S ONN, S %, ¢ xs > 1.4.2 EFFECT OF CHANGE OF PRESSURE ° *y Sublimauion We have already learnt that the difference in Solid <2 Gas various states of matter is due to the Deposition difference in the distances between the constituent particles. What will happen when we start putting pressure and compress a gas Fig. 1.9: interconversion of the three states of matter atmosphere {atm is a unit of measuring pressure exerted by a gas. The unit of pressure is Pascal (Pa): 1 atmosphere - 1.01. 10° Pa. The pressure of air in atmosphere is called atmospheric pressure. The atmospheric pressure at sea level is | atmosphere, and is taken as the normal atmospheric pressure. 8 Science. : Reprint 2025 26