Everyday we hear sounds from various sources like humans, birds, bells, machines, vehicles, televisions, radios etc. Sound is a form of energy which pr oduces a sensation of hearing in our ears. Ther e are also other forms of energy like mechanical energy, light energy, etc. We have talked about mechanical energy in the pr evious chapters. Y ou have been taught about conservation of energy, which states that we can neither create nor destroy energy. We can just change it fr om one form to another. When you clap, a sound is produced. Can you produce sound without utilising your energy? Which form of energy did you use to produce sound? In this chapter we are going to learn how sound is produced and how it is transmitted through a medium and received by our ears. 11.1 Production of Sound Activity _____________ 11.1 • Take a tuning fork and set it vibrating by striking its prong on a rubber pad. Bring it near your ear. • Do you hear any sound? • Touch one of the prongs of the vibrating tuning fork with your finger and share your experience with your friends. • Now, suspend a table tennis ball or a small plastic ball by a thr ead from a support [T ake a big needle and a thread, put a knot at one end of the thread, and then with the help of the needle pass the thr ead thr ough the ball]. T ouch the ball gently with the pr ong of a vibrating tuning fork (Fig. 11.1). • Observe what happens and discuss with your friends. Activity _____________ 11.2 • Fill water in a beaker or a glass up to the brim. Gently touch the water surface with one of the prongs of the vibrating tuning fork, as shown in Fig. 1 1.2. • Next dip the pr ongs of the vibrating tuning fork in water, as shown in Fig. 11.3. • Observe what happens in both the cases. • Discuss with your friends why this happens. Fig. 11.1: Vibrating tuning fork just touching the suspended table tennis ball. Fig. 11.2: One of the prongs of the vibrating tuning fork touching the water surface. 11 SSS SSOUND OUNDOUND OUNDOUND C hapter Reprint 2025-26
er = F C : hapter A1 sa Everyday we hear sounds from various sources like humans, birds, bells, machines. H vehicles, televisions, radios etc. Sound is a a form of energy which produces a sensation é Thread of hearing in our ears. There are also other é forms of energy like mechanical energy, light os energy, etc. We have talked about mechanical f energy in the previous chapters. You have é : ‘Table tennis ball been taught about conservation of energy. ny which states that we can neither create nor ied ry destroy energy. We can just change it from — one form to another. When you clap, a sound Vibrating tuning lork is produced. Can you produce sound without utilising your energy? Which form of energy did you use to produce sound? In this Fig. 11.1: Vibrating tuning fork just touching the chapter we are going to learn how sound is suspended table tennis ball. produced and how it is transmitted through a medium and received by our ears. * Activity 11.2 11.1 Production of Sound . Fill water in a beaker or a glass up to the brim, Gently touch the water surface Activity 11.1 with one of the prongs of the vibrating TT tuning fork, as shown in Fig, 11.2. ¢ ‘Take a tuning fork and set it vibrating « Next dip the prongs of the vibrating by stnking its prong on a rubber pad. tuning fork in water, as shown in Fig. Bring it near your ear. 11.3, . Do you hear any sound? . Observe what happens in both the . ‘Touch one of the prongs of the vibrating cases. tuning fork with your finger and share . Discuss with your friends why this your experience with your friends. happens. . Now, suspend a table tennis hall or a ; Vibrating tummng fork small plastic ball by a thread from a . support (Take a big needle and a Seer Gane thread, put a knot at one end of the eee ' thread, and then with the help of the H ! Ges: needle pass the thread through the H ? Water ball]. Touch the ball gently with the 4 : prong of a vibrating tuning 4 : fork (Fig. 11.1). H H . Observe what happens and discuss Men ae? with your friends. Fig. 11.2: One of the prongs of the vibrating tuning fork touching the water surface. Reprint 2025-26