SOUND 135 2. Stethoscope is a medical instrument used for listening to sounds produced within the body, mainly in the heart or lungs. In stethoscopes the sound of the patient’s heartbeat reaches the doctor’s ears by multiple reflection of sound, as shown in Fig.11.11. Fig. 11.12: Curved ceiling of a conference hall. Fig. 11.13: Sound board used in a big hall. uestion 1. Why are the ceilings of concert halls curved? 11.4Range of Hearing The audible range of sound for human beings extends from about 20 Hz to 20000 Hz (one Hz = one cycle/s). Children under the age of five and some animals, such as dogs can hear up to 25 kHz (1 kHz = 1000 Hz). As people grow older their ears become less sensitive to higher frequencies. Sounds of frequencies below 20 Hz are called infrasonic sound or infrasound. If we could hear infrasound we would hear the vibrations of a pendulum just as we hear the vibrations of the wings of a bee. Rhinoceroses communicate using infrasound of frequency as low as 5 Hz. Whales and elephants produce sound in the infrasound range. It is observed that some animals get disturbed before earthquakes. Earthquakes produce low-frequency infrasound before the main shock waves begin which possibly alert the animals. Frequencies higher than 20 kHz are called ultrasonic sound or ultrasound. Ultrasound is produced by animals such as dolphins, bats and porpoises. Moths of certain families have very sensitive hearing equipment. These moths can hear the high frequency Q Fig.11.11: Stethoscope 3. Generally the ceilings of concert halls, conference halls and cinema halls are curved so that sound after reflection reaches all corners of the hall, as shown in Fig 1 1.12. Sometimes a curved soundboard may be placed behind the stage so that the sound, after reflecting from the sound board, spreads evenly across the width of the hall (Fig 11.13). In these instruments, a tube followed by a conical opening reflects sound successively to guide most of the sound waves from the source in the forward direction towards the audience. Reprint 2025-26
In these instruments, a tube followed spttetese ess Sound board by a conical opening reflects sound se successively to guide most of the sound waves from the source in the forward direction towards the audience. 2. Stethoscope is a medical instrument used for listening to sounds produced Souree of sound within the body, mainly in the heart or lungs. In stethoscopes the sound of the patient's heartbeat reaches the doctor's ears by multiple reflection of sound. as shown in Fig.1 1.11. Visa ne Oe / Fig. 11.13: Sound board used ina big hall. ‘eet “ ‘ val oy 1 ; a pe yp A fs i. Y | 1. Way are the ceilings of concert Nie : Ceo - 3 halls curved? Fig.11.1 1: Stethoscope 11.4 Range of Hearing 3. Generally the ceilings of concert halls, The audible range of sound for human beings conterence halls and cinema halls are extends from about 20 Hz to 20000 Hz (one curved so that sound after reflection —_H# = one cycle/s). Children under the age of reaches all corners of the hall. as five and some animals, such as dogs can hear shown in Fig 11.12. Sometimes a UP to 25 kHz (1 kHz = 1000 Hz). As people curved soundboard may be placed prow older their ears become less sensitive to behind the stage so that the sound. higher frequencies. Sounds of frequencies after reflecting from the sound board. below 20 Hz are called infrasonic sound or spreads evenly across the width of the infrasound. If we could hear infrasound we hall (Fig 11.13). would hear the vibrations ofa pendulum just 7 as we hear the vibrations of the wings of a bee. Rhinoceroses communicate using infrasound a a aa an of frequency as low as 5 Hz. Whales and 1 we \’ ‘7 \ elephants produce sound in the infrasound i / \ aan uo \ z range. It is observed that some animals get ; J ~% - or S ‘s disturbed before earthquakes. Earthquakes peg po br an produce low-frequency infrasound before the tA oe x ‘y main shock waves begin which possibly alert oy the animals. Frequencies higher than 20 kHz > are called ultrasonic sound or ultrasound. i> Ultrasound is produced by animals such as ! dolphins, bats and porpoises. Moths of certain families have very sensitive hearing equipment. Fig. 11.12: Curved cetling of a conference hall. These moths can hear the high frequency Sovuan 135 Reprint 2025-26 :