SOUND 131 131131131131 How the brain interprets the frequency of an emitted sound is called its pitch. The faster the vibration of the source, the higher is the frequency and the higher is the pitch, as shown in Fig. 11.7. Thus, a high pitch sound corresponds to more number of compressions and rarefactions passing a fixed point per unit time. Objects of different sizes and conditions vibrate at different frequencies to produce sounds of different pitch. The magnitude of the maximum disturbance in the medium on either side of the mean value is called the amplitude of the wave. It is usually represented by the letter A, as shown in Fig. 11.6(c). For sound its unit will be that of density or pressure. The loudness or softness of a sound is determined basically by its amplitude. The amplitude of the sound wave depends upon the force with which an object is made to vibrate. If we strike a table lightly, we hear a soft sound because we produce a sound wave density of the medium oscillates between a maximum value and a minimum value. The change in density from the maximum value to the minimum value, then again to the maximum value, makes one complete oscillation. The number of such oscillations per unit time is the frequency of the sound wave. If we can count the number of the compressions or rarefactions that cross us per unit time, we will get the frequency of the sound wave. It is usually represented by n (G reek letter , nu). I ts SI unit is hertz (symbol, Hz). The time taken by two consecutive compressions or rarefactions to cross a fixed point is called the time period of the wave. In other words, we can say that the time taken for one complete oscillation is called the time period of the sound wave. It is represented by the symbol T. Its SI unit is second (s). Frequency and time period are related as follows: A violin and a flute may both be played at the same time in an orchestra. Both sounds travel through the same medium, that is, air and arrive at our ear at the same time. Both sounds travel at the same speed irrespective of the source. But the sounds we receive are dif ferent. This is due to the dif ferent characteristics associated with the sound. Pitch is one of the characteristics. = 1v T Fig. 11.7: Fig. 11.7:Fig. 11.7: Fig. 11.7:Fig. 11.7: Low pitch sound has low frequency and high pitch of sound has high frequency. Fig. 11.8:Fig. 11.8:Fig. 11.8:Fig. 11.8:Fig. 11.8: Soft sound has small amplitude and louder sound has large amplitude. Reprint 2025-26
. . Wave density of the mediurn oscillates between a disturbance maximutn value and a minimum value. The change in density from the maximum value to the minimum value, then again to the Tune maximum value, makes one complete oscillation. The nurnber of such oscillations per unit time is the frequency of the sound wave. If we can count the number of the Wave shape for a low pitched sound compressions or rarefactions that cross us . Wave per unit time, we will get the frequency of disturbance the sound wave. It is usually represented by v (Greek letter, nu). Its Sl unit is hertz . (symbol, Hz). Pune The time taken by two consecutive compressions or rarefactions to cross a fixed point is called the time period of the wave. In . other words, we can say that the time taken Wave shape fora high pitched sound for one complete oscillation is called the time ; period of the sound wave. It is represented by Fig. 11.7: Low pitch sound has low frequency and ihe symbol T. Its SI unit is second (s) high pitch of sound has high frequency. Frequency and titne period are related aS as shown in Fig. 11.6(c). For sound its unit follows: will be that of density or pressure. v= 1 The loudness or softness of a sound is “p detertnined basically by its amplitude. The . amplitude of the sound wave depends upon A violin and a flute may both be played . . . : . 2 the force with which an object is made to at the sare time in an orchestra. Both sounds . . . vibrate. If we strike a table lightly, we hear a travel through the sare medium, that is, air 7 7 . 3, soft sound because we produce a sound wave and arrive at our ear at the same time. Both sounds travel at the same speed irrespective Wave of the source. But the sounds we receive are ésturbance different. This is due to the different characteristics associated with the sound. rine Pitch is one of the characteristics. How the brain interprets the frequency Soft sound of an emitted sound is called its pitch. The faster the vibration of the source, the Ware . . ave higher is the frequency and the higher is ebsturbance the pitch, as shown in Fig. 11.7. Thus, a high pitch sound corresponds to more number of compressions and rarefactions passing a fixed point per unit time. Tone Objects of different sizes and conditions vibrate at different frequencies to produce sounds of different pitch. The magnitude of the maximutn Louder sound disturbance in the medium on either side of the mean value is called the amplitude of the Fig. 11.8: Sot at 1 hited ! vanes «sen aca) ar ceetareveceuriteae) Pace tags Test fee . 11.8: t sound has small amplitude anc wave. It is usually represented by the letter A, louder sound has large amplitude. Sonn 131 Reprint 2025-26