SCIENCE132 Q Q uestions 1. Which wave property determines (a) loudness, (b) pitch? 2. Guess which sound has a higher pitch: guitar or car horn? The speed of sound is defined as the distance which a point on a wave, such as a compression or a rarefaction, travels per unit time. We know, speed, v = distance / time = λ T Example 11.1 A sound wave has a frequency of 2 kHz and wave length 35 cm. How long will it take to travel 1.5 km? Solution: Given, Frequency, ν = 2 kHz = 2000 Hz Wavelength, λ = 35 cm = 0.35 m We know that speed, v of the wave = wavelength × frequency v = λ ν = 0.35 m 2000 Hz = 700 m/s The time taken by the wave to travel a distance, d of 1.5 km is Thus sound will take 2.1 s to travel a distance of 1.5 km. uestions 1. What are wavelength, frequency, time period and amplitude of a sound wave? 2. How are the wavelength and frequency of a sound wave related to its speed? 3. Calculate the wavelength of a sound wave whose frequency is 220 Hz and speed is 440 m/s in a given medium. 4. A person is listening to a tone of 500 Hz sitting at a distance of 450 m from the source of the sound. What is the time interval between successive compressions from the source? The amount of sound energy passing each second through unit area is called the intensity of sound. W e sometimes use the ter ms “loudness” and “intensity” interchangeably, but they are not the same. Loudness is a measure of the response of the ear to the sound. Even when two sounds are of equal intensity, we may hear one as louder than the other simply because our ear detects it better. of less energy (amplitude). If we hit the table hard we hear a louder sound. Can you tell why? A sound wave spreads out from its source. As it moves away from the source its amplitude as well as its loudness decreases. Louder sound can travel a larger distance as it is associated with higher energy. Fig. 11.8 shows the wave shapes of a loud and a soft sound of the same frequency. The quality or timber of sound is that characteristic which enables us to distinguish one sound from another having the same pitch and loudness. The sound which is more pleasant is said to be of a rich quality. A sound of single frequency is called a tone. The sound which is produced due to a mixture of several frequencies is called a note and is pleasant to listen to. Noise is unpleasant to the ear! Music is pleasant to hear and is of rich quality. Here λ is the wavelength of the sound wave. It is the distance travelled by the sound wave in one time period (T) of the wave. Thus, v = λ ν or v = λ ν That is, speed = wavelength × frequency. The speed of sound remains almost the same for all frequencies in a given medium under the same physical conditions. Reprint 2025-26
of less energy (amplitude). If we hit the table “Example 11.1 A sound wave has a_ hard we hear a louder sound. Can you tell frequency of 2 kHz and wave length why? A sound wave spreads out from its 35 em. How long will it take to travel source. As it moves away from the source its 1.5 km? , amplitude as well as its loudness decreases. Louder sound can travel a larger distance as Solution: it is associated with higher energy. Fig. 11.8 Given. shows the wave shapes of a loud and a soft Frequency, v = 2 kHz = 2000 Hz sound of the same frequency. Wavelength, 2 =35em =0.35m The quality or timber of sound is that We know that speed, vof the wave characteristic which enables us to distinguish = wavelength x frequency one sound from another having the same pitch vekyv ° and loudness. The sound which is more =0.35m 2000 Hz = 700 m/s pleasant is said to be of a rich quality. A sound The time taken by the wave to travel a of single frequency is called a tone. The sound distance, dof 1.5 km is which is produced due to a mixture of several e n frequencies is called a note and is pleasant to t= a = 1.5 x 1000 m = 1s $=2.1s. listen to. Noise is unpleasant to the ear! Music v 700m $7! 7 is pleasant to hear and is of rich quality. Thus sound will take 2.1 5 to travel a distance of 1.5 km. ( westions TT | | 1. Which wave property determines westious < fa) loudness, ih) pitch? . . J oof Wharare wavelength, trequcncy. ' { 2. Guess which sound has a higher time period and amplitude of a Wy, pitch: guitar or car horn? sound wave? | | 2. How are the wavelengih and The speed of sound is defined as the % frequency of a sound Wane ate ca auraiie @ ae « related to its speed? distance which a point on a wave, such as a Calculate the wavelensth of a compression or a rarefaction, travels per unit “ sound wave whose frequency is We now 2202 and speed is d4Oiun/s in ° . . a given mediun, speed. v= distance / time 4. A person is listening to a tone of _ a 5OO Hz sitting at a distance of - T 450m from he source of dic sound, What is the tinic interval Here 7 is the wavelength of the sound wave. It DeAVCCN SUCCCSSIVC CONIPICSSIONS is the distance travelled by the sound wave in front the source? one time period (7) of the wave. Thus. . The amount of sound energy passing each a if LL | second through unit area is called the intensity VEAN . OT | of sound. We sometimes use the terms . “loudness” and “intensity” interchangeably, . or veav . but they are not the same. Loudness is a Phat is, speed = wavelength x frequency. measure of the response of the ear to the sound. The speed of sound remains almost the Even when two sounds are of equal intensity, same for all frequencies in a given medium we may hear one as louder than the other under the same physical conditions. simply because our ear detects it better. 132 Scene : Reprint 2025-26