SCIENCE134 11.3.1ECHO If we shout or clap near a suitable reflecting object such as a tall building or a mountain,we will hear the same sound again a little later . This sound which we hear is called an echo. The sensation of sound persists in our brain for about 0.1 s. To hear a distinct echo the time interval between the original sound and the reflected one must be at least 0.1s. If we take the speed of sound to be 344 m/s at a given temperatur e, say at 22 ºC in air , the sound must go to the obstacle and reach back the ear of the listener on reflection after 0.1s. Hence, the total distance covered by the sound from the point of generation to the reflecting surface and back should be at least (344 m/s) × 0.1 s = 34.4 m. Thus, for hearing distinct echoes, the minimum distance of the obstacle from the source of sound must be half of this distance, that is, 17.2 m. This distance will change with the temperature of air. Echoes may be heard more than once due to successive or multiple reflections. The rolling of thunder is due to the successive reflections of the sound from a number of reflecting surfaces, such as the clouds and the land. 11.3.2REVERBERATION A sound created in a big hall will persist by repeated reflection from the walls until it is reduced to a value where it is no longer audible. The repeated reflection that results in this persistence of sound is called reverberation. In an auditorium or big hall excessive reverberation is highly undesirable. To reduce reverberation, the roof and walls of the auditorium are generally covered with sound-absorbent materials like compressed fibreboard, rough plaster or draperies. The seat materials are also selected on the basis of their sound absorbing properties. Example 11.2 A person clapped his hands near a cliff and heard the echo after 2 s. What is the distance of the cliff from the person if the speed of the sound, v is taken as 346 m s–1? Solution: Given, Speed of sound, v = 346 m s–1 Time taken for hearing the echo, t = 2 s Distance travelled by the sound = v × t = 346 m s–1 × 2 s = 692 m In 2 s sound has to travel twice the distance between the cliff and the person. Hence, the distance between the cliff and the person = 692 m/2 = 346 m. Q Horn Megaphone Fig 11.10: A megaphone and a horn. uestion 1. An echo is heard in 3 s. What is the distance of the reflecting surface from the source, given that the speed of sound is 342 m s–1? 11.3.3USES OF MULTIPLE REFLECTION OF SOUND 1. Megaphones or loudhailers, horns, musical instruments such as trumpets and shehanais, are all designed to send sound in a particular direction without spreading it in all directions, as shown in Fig 11.10. Reprint 2025-26
11.3.1 EcHo What is the distance of the cliff from the . person if the speed of the sound. vis If we shout or clap near a suitable reflecting , ne QA ale ° taken as 346 ms'? object such as a tall building or a mountain,we will hear the same sound Solution: again a little later. This sound which we hear is called an echo. The sensation of Given, sound persists in our brain for about 0.1 Speed of sound, v= 346 ms"! s. To hear a distinet echo the time interval Time taken for hearing the echo, between the original sound and the t=2s reflected one must be at least 0.1s. If we Distance travelled by the sound take the speed of sound to be 344 m/s ata evxf(=346ms'x2s=2692m given temperature, say at 22 °C in air, the In 2 s sound has to travel twice the sound must go to the obstacle and reach distance between the cliff and the back the ear of the listener on reflection after : en person. Hence. the distance between the 0O.1s. Hence, the total distance covered by ; the sound from the point of generation to cliff and the person the reflecting surface and back should be = 692 m/2 = 346m. at least (344 m/s) x 0.1 s = 34.4 m. Thus, . for hearing distinct echoes, the minimum (\ west 1Onl distance of the obstacle from the source of | sound must be half of this distance, that I. An echo ts heard in Gs. What is is. 17.2 m. This distance will change with the distance of the reflecting the temperature of air. Echoes may be heard \ surface trom the source, given that more than once due to successive or AY the speed of sound is G4A2QMs >? multiple reflections. The rolling of thunder is due to the successive reflections of the 11.3.3 USES OF MULTIPLE REFLECTION sound from a number of reflecting surfaces, OF SOUND such as the clouds and the land. 1. Megaphones or loudhailers, horns. 11.3.2 REVERBERATION musical instruments such as trumpets A sound created in a big hall will persist and shehanais. are all designed to send by repeated reflection from the walls until sound in a particular direction without itis reduced to a value where it is no longer spreading it in all directions, as shown audible. The repeated reflection that in Fig 11.10. results in this persistence of sound is called reverberation. In an auditorium or (4 _ big hall excessive reverberation is highly a ® ee undesirable. To reduce reverberation, the ray . a roof and walls of the auditorium are \e = a generally covered with sound-absorbent materials like compressed fibreboard, Megaphone rough plaster or draperies. The seat a materials are also selected on the basis of /@ rd — -- their sound absorbing properties. wy, ( ae . - ~— aa aS Horn Example 11.2 A person clapped his hands near a cliffand heard the echo after 2 s. Fig 11.10: A megaphone and a horn. 134 Sewer : Reprint 2025-26