SOUND 129 propagates through the medium. Compression is the r egion of high pr essure and rarefaction is the region of low pressure. Pressure is related to the number of particles of a medium in a given volume. More density of the particles in the medium gives mor e pressure and vice versa. Thus, pr opagation of sound can be visualised as propagation of density variations or pr essure variations in the medium. uestion 1. How does the sound produced by a vibrating object in a medium reach your ear? 2. Explain how sound is produced by your school bell. 3. Why are sound waves called mechanical waves? 4. Suppose you and your friend are on the moon. Will you be able to hear any sound pr oduced by your friend? 11.2.1SOUND WAVES ARE LONGITUDINAL WAVES Activity _____________ 11.4 • Take a slinky. Ask your friend to hold one end. You hold the other end. Now str etch the slinky as shown in Fig. 11.5(a). Then give it a sharp push towards your friend. • What do you notice? If you move your hand pushing and pulling the slinky alternatively, what will you observe? • If you mark a dot on the slinky, you will observe that the dot on the slinky will move back and forth parallel to the direction of the propagation of the disturbance. The regions where the coils become closer are called compressions (C) and the regions where the coils are further apart are called rarefactions (R). As we already know, sound propagates in the medium as a series of compressions and rarefactions. Now, we can compare the propagation of disturbance in a slinky with the sound propagation in the medium. These waves are called longitudinal waves. In these waves the individual particles of the medium move in a direction parallel to the direction of propagation of the disturbance. The particles do not move from one place to another but they simply oscillate back and forth about their position of rest. This is exactly how a sound wave propagates, hence sound waves are longitudinal waves. There is also another type of wave, called a transverse wave. In a transverse wave particles do not oscillate along the direction of wave propagation but oscillate up and down about their mean position as the wave travels. Thus, a transverse wave is the one in which the individual particles of the medium move about their mean positions in a direction perpendicular to the direction of wave propagation. When we drop a pebble in a pond, the waves you see on the water surface is an example of transverse wave. Light is a transverse wave but for light, the oscillations are not of the medium particles or their pressure or density— it is not a mechanical wave. Y ou will come to know mor e about transverse waves in higher classes. 11.2.2CHARACTERISTICS OF A SOUND WAVE We can describe a sound wave by its • frequency • amplitude and • speed. Q A sound wave in graphic form is shown in Fig. 11.6(c), which represents how density and pressure change when the sound wave moves in the medium. The density as well as the pressure of the medium at a given time varies with distance, above and below the average value of density and pressure. Fig. 11.6(a) and (b) (a) Fig. 11.5: Longitudinal wave in a slinky. Reprint 2025-26
propagates through the medium. The regions where the coils become closer Compression is the region of high pressure are called compressions (C) and the regions and rarefaction is the region of low pressure. — where the coils are further apart are called Pressure is related to the number of particles parefactions (R). As we already know, sound ofa medium in a given volume. More density propagates in the medium as a series of of the particles in the medium gives more compressions and rarefactions. Now, we can pressure and vice versa. Thus, propagation compare the propagation of disturbance ina of sound can be visualised as propagation of slinky with the sound propagation in the density variations or pressure variations in . y “Wty gneaea apsaareocs « p we pans : the medium. medium. These waves are called longitudinal waves. In these waves the individual particles fr weslion of the medium move ina direction parallel to fl ae the direction of propagation of the disturbance. | 1. How does the sound produced by The particles do not move from one place to | | a vibrating object ina medium another but they simply oscillate back and | reach vour car? forth about their position of rest. This is VJ 2.) Explain how sound is produced exactly how a sound wave propagates, hence by vour school bell. sound waves are longitudinal waves. 3 Whvoare sound waves called There is also another type of wave, called mechanical waves? a transverse wave. In a transverse wave 4. Suppose vou and vour tricnd are particles do not oscillate along the direction on the moon. Will vou be able to of wave propagation but oscillate up and down hear any sound produced by about their mean position as the wave travels. Wour tricnd? Thus, a transverse wave is the one in which the individual particles of the medium move 11.2.1 SOUND WAVES ARE LONGITUDINAL = about their mean positions in a direction OR UEC perpendicular to the direction of wave WAVES propagation. When we drop a pebble in a Activity 11.4 pond. the waves you see on the water surface TT $s an example of transverse wave. Light is a ¢ Take a slinky. Ask your trend to hold transverse wave but for light. the oscillations one end. You hold the other end. are not of the medium particles or their Now stretch the slinky as shown ne pressure or density— it is not a mechanical Fig. 11.5(a). Then give it a sharp push ° towards your friend. wave. You will come to know more about ¢ = What do you notice? Ifyou move your transverse waves in higher classes. hand pushing and pulling the slinky alternatively, what will you observe? 11.2.2 CHARACTERISTICS OF A SOUND . If you mark a dot on the slinky, you WAVE will observe that the dot on the slinky will move back and forth parallel to We can describe a sound wave by its the direction of the propagation of the ¢ frequency disturbance. ¢ amplitude and / ‘, * speed. a fa) a A sound wave in graphic form is shown in * Fig. 11.6(c), which represents how density and ies | ares ol aa pressure change when the sound wave moves (pCO IITT TOT NS in the medium. The density as well as the wb. —4 ° ° » pressure of the medium at a given time varies th} with distance. above and below the average Pig. 11.5: Longitudinal wave ina slinky. value of density and pressure. Fig. 11.6(a) and Sovuan 129 Reprint 2025-26 :