SOUND 137 What you have learnt • Sound is produced due to vibration of different objects. • Sound travels as a longitudinal wave through a material medium. • Sound travels as successive compressions and rarefactions in the medium. • In sound propagation, it is the energy of the sound that travels and not the particles of the medium. • The change in density from one maximum value to the minimum value and again to the maximum value makes one complete oscillation. • The distance between two consecutive compressions or two consecutive rarefactions is called the wavelength, λ. • The time taken by the wave for one complete oscillation of the density or pressure of the medium is called the time period, T. • The number of complete oscillations per unit time is called the frequency (ν ), 1=v .T • The speed v, frequency ν, and wavelength λ, of sound are related by the equation, v = λν. • The speed of sound depends primarily on the nature and the temperature of the transmitting medium. • The law of reflection of sound states that the directions in which the sound is incident and reflected make equal angles with the normal to the reflecting surface at the point of incidence and the three lie in the same plane. • For hearing a distinct sound, the time interval between the original sound and the reflected one must be at least 0.1 s. • The persistence of sound in an auditorium is the result of repeated reflections of sound and is called reverberation. These waves are then converted into electrical signals that are used to generate images of the organ. These images are then displayed on a monitor or printed on a film. This technique is called ‘ultrasonography’. Ultrasonography is also used for examination of the foetus during pregnancy to detect congenial defects and growth abnormalities. • Ultrasound may be employed to break small ‘stones’ formed in the kidneys into fine grains. These grains later get flushed out with urine. Reprint 2025-26
These waves are then converted into examination of the foetus during electrical signals that are used to pregnancy to detect congenial detects generate images of the organ. These and growth abnormalities. images are then displayed on a monitor e = Ultrasound may be employed to break or printed on a film. This technique small ‘stones’ formed in the kidneys is called ‘ultrasonography’. into fine grains. These grains later get Ultrasonography is also used for flushed out with urine. Ld) What SL BR Nii you have ‘ ae vA learnt — ° Sound is produced due to vibration of different objects. ° Sound travels as a longitudinal wave through a material medium. ° Sound travels as successive compressions and rarefactions in the medium. ° In sound propagation, it is the energy of the sound that travels and not the particles of the medium. ° The change in density from one maximum value to the minimum value and again to the maximum value makes one complete oscillation. ° The distance between two consecutive compressions or two consecutive rarefactions is called the wavelength, 2. ° The time taken by the wave for one complete oscillation of the density or pressure of the medium is called the time period, T. ° The number of complete oscillations per unit time is called . 1 the frequency (¥), ver ° The speed v, frequency v, and wavelength 7%, of sound are related by the equation, v = dv. ° The speed of sound depends primarily on the nature and the temperature of the transmitting medium. ° The law of reflection of sound states that the directions in which the sound is incident and reflected make equal angles with the normal to the reflecting surface at the point of incidence and the three lie in the same plane. ° For hearing a distinet sound, the time interval between the original sound and the reflected one must be at least 0.1 s. ° The persistence of sound in an auditorium is the result of repeated reflections of sound and is called reverberation. Souxp 137 Reprint 2025-26