SCIENCE130 Heinrich Rudolph Hertz was born on 22 February 1857 in Hamburg, Germany and educated at the University of Berlin. He confirmed J.C. Maxwell’s electromagnetic theory by his experiments. He laid the foundation for future development of radio, telephone, telegraph and even television. He also discovered the photoelectric effect which was later explained by Albert Einstein. The SI unit of frequency was named as hertz in his honour. Fig. 11.6(b) represent the density and pressure variations, respectively, as a sound wave propagates in the medium. Compressions are the regions where particles are crowded together and represented by the upper portion of the curve in Fig. 11.6(c). The peak represents the region of maximum compression. Thus, compressions are regions where density as well as pressure is high. Rarefactions are the regions of low pressure where particles are spread apart and are represented by the valley, that is, the lower portion of the curve in Fig. 11.6(c). A peak is called the crest and a valley is called the trough of a wave. The distance between two consecutive compressions (C) or two consecutive rarefactions (R) is called the wavelength, as shown in Fig. 11.6(c), The wavelength is usually represented by λ (Greek letter lambda). Its SI unit is metre (m). H. R. Hertz Fig. 11.6: Sound propagates as density or pressure variations as shown in (a) and (b), (c) represents graphically the density and pressure variations. Frequency tells us how frequently an event occurs. Suppose you are beating a drum. How many times you are beating the drum in unit time is called the frequency of your beating the drum. We know that when sound is propagated through a medium, the Reprint 2025-26
7 s a Sy " eS ens es ! 1g. | | sb) hone sent he a nsity and Heinrich Rudolph Hertz pressure variations, respectively, as a soun F was born on 22 February wave propagates in the medium. ‘ 1857 in Hamburg. Compressions are the regions where . Germany and educated at particles are crowded together and rath the University of Berlin. He represented by the upper portion of the curve tia confirmed J.C. Maxwell's in Fig. 11.6(¢). The peak represents the region a electromagnetic theory by of maximum compression. Thus. a. his experiments. He laid the compressions are regions where density as HOR Hertz foundation for future well as pressure is high. Rarefactions are the development of radio, telephone, telegraph regions of low pressure where particles are and even television. He also discovered the spread apart and are represented by the photoelectric effect which was later valley. that is, the lower portion of the curve explained by Albert Einstein. The SI unit of in Fig. 11.6(c). A peak is called the crest anda frequency was named as hertz in his honour. valley is called the trough of a wave. The distance between two consecutive Frequency tells us how frequently an compressions (C) or two consecutive event occurs, Suppose you are beating a rarefactions (R) is called the wavelength, as drum. How many times you are beating the shown in Fig. 11.6({c), The wavelength is drum in unit time is called the frequency of usually represented by % (Greek letter your beating the drum. We know that when lambda). Its SI unit is metre (m). sound is propagated through a medium, the Density variations Sree Pee Bae a Reet a AG LRG, SENOS “SRS 2 Cc R Cc R Cc R Cc fa) * Pressure variations Cc R Cc R Cc R c 2 <———_> Crest Density A . i sity Average density or or pressure Pressure Trough Distance —+ (cl Fig. 11.6: Sound propagates as density or pressure variations as shown in (aj and (bj, (c} represents &raphically the densiiv and pressure variations, 130 Scene Reprint 2025-26