[Page 1]
In everyday life, we see some objects at r est and others in motion. Bir ds fly, fish swim, blood flows through veins and arteries, and cars move. Atoms, molecules, planets, stars and galaxies ar e all in motion. W e often perceive an object to be in motion when its position changes with time. However , there are situations wher e the motion is inferr ed through indirect evidences. For example, we infer the motion of air by observing the movement of dust and the movement of leaves and branches of tr ees. What causes the phenomena of sunrise, sunset and changing of seasons? Is it due to the motion of the earth? If it is true, why don’t we dir ectly perceive the motion of the earth? An object may appear to be moving for one person and stationary for some other. For the passengers in a moving bus, the roadside trees appear to be moving backwar ds. A person standing on the r oad–side perceives the bus alongwith the passengers as moving. However, a passenger inside the bus sees his fellow passengers to be at rest. What do these observations indicate? Most motions are complex. Some objects may move in a straight line, others may take a circular path. Some may r otate and a few others may vibrate. There may be situations involving a combination of these. In this chapter, we shall first lear n to describe the motion of objects along a straight line. W e shall also lear n to expr ess such motions through simple equations and graphs. Later, we shall discuss ways of describing circular motion. Activity 7.1 • Discuss whether the walls of your classr oom are at rest or in motion. Activity 7.2 • Have you ever experienced that the train in which you are sitting appears to move while it is at rest? • Discuss and share your experience. Think and Act We sometimes are endangered by the motion of objects around us, especially if that motion is erratic and uncontrolled as observed in a flooded river, a hurricane or a tsunami. On the other hand, controlled motion can be a service to human beings such as in the generation of hydro-electric power. Do you feel the necessity to study the erratic motion of some objects and learn to control them? 7.1 Describing Motion We describe the location of an object by specifying a r efer ence point. Let us understand this by an example. Let us assume that a school in a village is 2 km north of the railway station. We have specified the position of the school with r espect to the railway station. In this example, the railway station is the reference point. We could have also chosen other reference points according to our convenience. Therefore, to describe the position of an object we need to specify a reference point called the origin. 7 MMM MMOTION OTIONOTION OTIONOTION C hapter

[Page 2]
7.1.1 MOTION ALONG A STRAIGHT LINE The simplest type of motion is the motion along a straight line. W e shall first lear n to describe this by an example. Consider the motion of an object moving along a straight path. The object starts its jour ney fr om O which is tr eated as its r efer ence point (Fig. 7.1). Let A, B and C represent the position of the object at different instants. At first, the object moves through C and B and reaches A. Then it moves back along the same path and reaches C through B. are used to describe the overall motion of an object and to locate its final position with reference to its initial position at a given time. Activity 7.3 • Take a metre scale and a long rope. • Walk from one corner of a basket-ball court to its oppposite cor ner along its sides. • Measure the distance cover ed by you and magnitude of the displacement. • What dif fer ence would you notice between the two in this case? Activity 7.4 • Automobiles are fitted with a device that shows the distance travelled. Such a device is known as an odometer . A car is driven fr om Bhubaneshwar to New Delhi. The difference between the final reading and the initial reading of the odometer is 1850 km. • Find the magnitude of the displacement between Bhubaneshwar and New Delhi by using the Road Map of India. The total path length covered by the object is OA + AC, that is 60 km + 35 km = 95 km. This is the distance covered by the object. To describe distance we need to specify only the numerical value and not the dir ection of motion. There are certain quantities which are described by specifying only their numerical values. The numerical value of a physical quantity is its magnitude. From this example, can you find out the distance of the final position C of the object from the initial position O? This difference will give you the numerical value of the displacement of the object from O to C thr ough A. The shortest distance measured from the initial to the final position of an object is known as the displacement. Can the magnitude of the displacement be equal to the distance travelled by an object? Consider the example given in (Fig. 7.1). For motion of the object from O to A, the distance covered is 60 km and the magnitude of displacement is also 60 km. During its motion from O to A and back to B, the distance covered Fig. 7.1: Positions of an object on a straight line path = 60 km + 25 km = 85 km while the magnitude of displacement = 35 km. Thus, the magnitude of displacement (35 km) is not equal to the path length (85 km). Further, we will notice that the magnitude of the displacement for a course of motion may be zero but the corresponding distance covered is not zero. If we consider the object to travel back to O, the final position concides with the initial position, and therefore, the displacement is zero. However, the distance covered in this journey is OA + AO = 60 km + 60 km = 120 km. Thus, two different physical quantities—the distance and the displacement, MOTION 73

[Page 3]
SCIENCE74 uestions 1. An object has moved through a distance. Can it have zer o displacement? If yes, support your answer with an example. 2. A far mer moves along the boundary of a square field of side 10 m in 40 s. What will be the magnitude of displacement of the farmer at the end of 2 minutes 20 seconds from his initial position? 3. Which of the following is true for displacement? (a) It cannot be zero. (b) Its magnitude is greater than the distance travelled by the object. 7.1.2 UNIFORM MOTION AND NON - UNIFORM MOTION Consider an object moving along a straight line. Let it travel 5 m in the first second, 5 m mor e in the next second , 5 m in the third second and 5 m in the fourth second. In this case, the object covers 5 m in each second. As the object covers equal distances in equal intervals of time, it is said to be in uniform motion. The time interval in this motion should be small. In our day-to-day life, we come acr oss motions wher e objects cover unequal distances in equal intervals of time, for example, when a car is moving on a cr owded str eet or a person is jogging in a park. These ar e some instances of non-uniform motion. Activity 7.5 • The data regarding the motion of two different objects A and B ar e given in Table 7.1. • Examine them car efully and state whether the motion of the objects is uniform or non-uniform. Q (a) (b) Fig. 7.2 Table 7.1 Time Distance Distance travelled by travelled by object A in m object B in m 9:30 am 10 12 9:45 am 20 19 10:00 am 30 23 10:15 am 40 35 10:30 am 50 37 10:45 am 60 41 11:00 am 70 44 7.2 Measuring the Rate of Motion

[Page 4]
MOTION 75 Look at the situations given in Fig. 7.2. If the bowling speed is 143 km h–1 in Fig. 7.2(a) what does it mean? What do you understand from the signboard in Fig. 7.2(b)? Dif fer ent objects may take dif fer ent amounts of time to cover a given distance. Some of them move fast and some move slowly. The rate at which objects move can be different. Also, differ ent objects can move at the same rate. One of the ways of measuring the rate of motion of an object is to find out the distance travelled by the object in unit time. This quantity is r eferred to as speed. The SI unit of speed is metre per second. This is r epresented by the symbol m s–1 or m/s. The other units of speed include centimetre per second (cm s–1) and kilometre per hour (km h–1). To specify the speed of an object, we r equire only its magnitude. The speed of an object need not be constant. In most cases, objects will be in non-uniform motion. Ther efore, we describe the rate of motion of such objects in ter ms of their average speed. The average speed of an object is obtained by dividing the total distance travelled by the total time taken. That is, average speed = Total distance travelled Total time taken If an object travels a distance s in time t then its speed v is, v = s t (7.1) Let us understand this by an example. A car travels a distance of 100 km in 2 h. Its average speed is 50 km h –1. The car might not have travelled at 50 km h –1 all the time. Sometimes it might have travelled faster and sometimes slower than this. Example 7.1 An object travels 16 m in 4 s and then another 16 m in 2 s. What is the average speed of the object? Solution: Total distance travelled by the object = 16 m + 16 m = 32 m Total time taken = 4 s + 2 s = 6 s Average speed = Total distance travelled Total time taken = 32 m 6 s = 5.33 m s–1 Therefore, the average speed of the object is 5.33 m s–1. 7.2.1 SPEED WITH DIRECTION The rate of motion of an object can be mor e comprehensive if we specify its dir ection of motion along with its speed. The quantity that specifies both these aspects is called velocity. Velocity is the speed of an object moving in a definite dir ection. The velocity of an object can be uniform or variable. It can be changed by changing the object’s speed, dir ection of motion or both. When an object is moving along a straight line at a variable speed, we can expr ess the magnitude of its rate of motion in ter ms of average velocity. It is calculated in the same way as we calculate average speed. In case the velocity of the object is changing at a unifor m rate, then average velocity is given by the arithmetic mean of initial velocity and final velocity for a given period of time. That is, average velocity = initial velocity + final velocity 2 Mathematically, v av = u + v 2 (7.2) where vav is the average velocity, u is the initial velocity and v is the final velocity of the object. Speed and velocity have the same units, that is, m s–1 or m/s. Activity 7.6 • Measure the time it takes you to walk from your house to your bus stop or the school. If you consider that your average walking speed is 4 km h –1, estimate the distance of the bus stop or school from your house.