[Page 9]
SCIENCE108 water on the bottle is greater than its weight. Therefore it rises up when released. To keep the bottle completely immersed, the upward force on the bottle due to water must be balanced. This can be achieved by an externally applied force acting downwards. This force must at least be equal to the differ ence between the upward force and the weight of the bottle. The upward force exerted by the water on the bottle is known as upthrust or buoyant force. In fact, all objects experience a force of buoyancy when they are immersed in a fluid. The magnitude of this buoyant force depends on the density of the fluid. 9.5.3 WHY OBJECTS FLOAT OR SINK WHEN PLACED ON THE SURFACE OF WATER? Let us do the following activities to arrive at an answer for the above question. Activity 9.5 • Take a beaker filled with water . • Take an ir on nail and place it on the surface of the water . • Observe what happens. The nail sinks. The force due to the gravitational attraction of the earth on the iron nail pulls it downwar ds. Ther e is an upthrust of water on the nail, which pushes it upwards. But the downwar d force acting on the nail is greater than the upthrust of water on the nail. So it sinks (Fig. 9.5). exert pressure on the base and walls of the container in which they are enclosed. Pressure exerted in any confined mass of fluid is transmitted undiminished in all directions. 9.5.2 BUOYANCY Have you ever had a swim in a pool and felt lighter? Have you ever drawn water fr om a well and felt that the bucket of water is heavier when it is out of the water? Have you ever wondered why a ship made of iron and steel does not sink in sea water, but while the same amount of iron and steel in the form of a sheet would sink? These questions can be answered by taking buoyancy in consideration. Let us understand the meaning of buoyancy by doing an activity. Activity 9.4 • Take an empty plastic bottle. Close the mouth of the bottle with an airtight stopper . Put it in a bucket filled with water . Y ou see that the bottle floats. • Push the bottle into the water. You feel an upward push. Try to push it further down. You will find it difficult to push deeper and deeper. This indicates that water exerts a force on the bottle in the upward dir ection. The upwar d force exerted by the water goes on increasing as the bottle is pushed deeper till it is completely immersed. • Now, r elease the bottle. It bounces back to the surface. • Does the force due to the gravitational attraction of the earth act on this bottle? If so, why doesn’t the bottle stay immersed in water after it is released? How can you immerse the bottle in water? The force due to the gravitational attraction of the earth acts on the bottle in the downwar d dir ection. So the bottle is pulled downwards. But the water exerts an upward force on the bottle. Thus, the bottle is pushed upwards. We have learnt that weight of an object is the force due to gravitational attraction of the earth. When the bottle is immersed, the upward force exerted by the Fig. 9.5: An iron nail sinks and a cork floats when placed on the surface of water.

[Page 10]
GRAVITATION 109 • Observe what happens to elongation of the string or the r eading on the balance. You will find that the elongation of the string or the reading of the balance decreases as the stone is gradually lowered in the water. However, no further change is observed once the stone gets fully immersed in the water. What do you infer from the decrease in the extension of the string or the reading of the spring balance? We know that the elongation produced in the string or the spring balance is due to the weight of the stone. Since the extension decreases once the stone is lowered in water, it means that some force acts on the stone in upward direction. As a result, the net force on the string decreases and hence the elongation also decr eases. As discussed earlier , this upward force exerted by water is known as the force of buoyancy. What is the magnitude of the buoyant force experienced by a body? Is it the same in all fluids for a given body? Do all bodies in a given fluid experience the same buoyant force? The answer to these questions is contained in Archimedes’ principle, stated as follows: Activity 9.6 • Take a beaker filled with water . • Take a piece of cork and an iron nail of equal mass. • Place them on the surface of water. • Observe what happens. The cork floats while the nail sinks. This happens because of the dif ference in their densities. The density of a substance is defined as the mass per unit volume. The density of cork is less than the density of water. This means that the upthrust of water on the cork is greater than the weight of the cork. So it floats (Fig. 9.5). The density of an iron nail is more than the density of water . This means that the upthrust of water on the iron nail is less than the weight of the nail. So it sinks. Therefore objects of density less than that of a liquid float on the liquid. The objects of density greater than that of a liquid sink in the liquid. uestions 1. Why is it difficult to hold a school bag having a strap made of a thin and strong string? 2. What do you mean by buoyancy? 3. Why does an object float or sink when placed on the sur face of water? 9.6 Archimedes’ Principle Activity 9.7 • Take a piece of stone and tie it to one end of a rubber string or a spring balance. • Suspend the stone by holding the balance or the string as shown in Fig. 9.6 (a). • Note the elongation of the string or the reading on the spring balance due to the weight of the stone. • Now, slowly dip the stone in the water in a container as shown in Fig. 9.6 (b). Fig. 9.6: (a) Observe the elongation of the rubber string due to the weight of a piece of stone suspended from it in air. (b) The elongation decr eases as the stone is immersed in water. (a) (b) Q

[Page 11]
SCIENCE110 What you have learnt • The law of gravitation states that the force of attraction between any two objects is proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them. The law applies to objects anywhere in the universe. Such a law is said to be universal. • Gravitation is a weak force unless large masses are involved. • The force of gravity decreases with altitude. It also varies on the surface of the earth, decreasing from poles to the equator. • The weight of a body is the force with which the earth attracts it. • The weight is equal to the pr oduct of mass and acceleration due to gravity. • The weight may vary from place to place but the mass stays constant. When a body is immersed fully or partially in a fluid, it experiences an upward force that is equal to the weight of the fluid displaced by it. Now, can you explain why a further decrease in the elongation of the string was not observed in activity 9.7, as the stone was fully immersed in water? Archimedes was a Greek scientist. He discovered the principle, subsequently named after him, after noticing that the water in a bathtub overflowed when he stepped into it. He ran through the streets shouting “Eureka!”, which means “I have got it”. This knowledge helped him to determine the purity of the gold in the crown made for the king. His work in the field of Geometry and Mechanics made him famous. His understanding of levers, pulleys, wheels- and-axle helped the Greek army in its war with Roman army. Archimedes Q Archimedes’ principle has many applications. It is used in designing ships and submarines. Lactometers, which are used to determine the purity of a sample of milk and hydrometers used for determining density of liquids, are based on this principle. uestions 1. You find your mass to be 42 kg on a weighing machine. Is your mass more or less than 42 kg? 2. You have a bag of cotton and an iron bar, each indicating a mass of 100 kg when measured on a weighing machine. In reality, one is heavier than other . Can you say which one is heavier and why?

[Page 12]
GRAVITATION 111 • All objects experience a force of buoyancy when they are immersed in a fluid. • Objects having density less than that of the liquid in which they are immersed, float on the sur face of the liquid. If the density of the object is more than the density of the liquid in which it is immersed then it sinks in the liquid. E xercises 1. How does the force of gravitation between two objects change when the distance between them is reduced to half ? 2. Gravitational force acts on all objects in proportion to their masses. Why then, a heavy object does not fall faster than a light object? 3. What is the magnitude of the gravitational force between the earth and a 1 kg object on its surface? (Mass of the earth is 6 × 1024 kg and radius of the earth is 6.4 × 106 m.) 4. The earth and the moon ar e attracted to each other by gravitational force. Does the earth attract the moon with a force that is greater or smaller or the same as the force with which the moon attracts the earth? Why? 5. If the moon attracts the earth, why does the earth not move towards the moon? 6. What happens to the force between two objects, if (i) the mass of one object is doubled? (ii) the distance between the objects is doubled and tripled? (iii) the masses of both objects are doubled? 7. What is the importance of universal law of gravitation? 8. What is the acceleration of free fall? 9. What do we call the gravitational force between the earth and an object? 10. Amit buys few grams of gold at the poles as per the instruction of one of his friends. He hands over the same when he meets him at the equator. Will the friend agree with the weight of gold bought? If not, why? [Hint : The value of g is greater at the poles than at the equator.] 11. Why will a sheet of paper fall slower than one that is crumpled into a ball? 12. Gravitational force on the sur face of the moon is only 1 6 as strong as gravitational force on the earth. What is the weight in newtons of a 10 kg object on the moon and on the earth?

[Page 13]
SCIENCE112 13. A ball is thrown vertically upwards with a velocity of 49 m/s. Calculate (i) the maximum height to which it rises, (ii) the total time it takes to return to the surface of the earth. 14. A stone is r eleased from the top of a tower of height 19.6 m. Calculate its final velocity just before touching the ground. 15. A stone is thrown vertically upward with an initial velocity of 40 m/s. Taking g = 10 m/s 2, find the maximum height reached by the stone. What is the net displacement and the total distance covered by the stone? 16. Calculate the force of gravitation between the earth and the Sun, given that the mass of the earth = 6 × 1024 kg and of the Sun = 2 × 10 30 kg. The average distance between the two is 1.5 × 1011 m. 17. A stone is allowed to fall from the top of a tower 100 m high and at the same time another stone is projected vertically upwards from the ground with a velocity of 25 m/s. Calculate when and where the two stones will meet. 18. A ball thrown up vertically returns to the thrower after 6 s. Find (a) the velocity with which it was thrown up, (b) the maximum height it reaches, and (c) its position after 4 s. 19. In what direction does the buoyant force on an object immersed in a liquid act? 20. Why does a block of plastic released under water come up to the surface of water? 21. The volume of 50 g of a substance is 20 cm3. If the density of water is 1 g cm –3, will the substance float or sink? 22. The volume of a 500 g sealed packet is 350 cm 3. Will the packet float or sink in water if the density of water is 1 g cm–3? What will be the mass of the water displaced by this packet?