[Page 9]
SCIENCE108 water on the bottle is greater than its weight. Therefore it rises up when released. To keep the bottle completely immersed, the upward force on the bottle due to water must be balanced. This can be achieved by an externally applied force acting downwards. This for ce must at least be equal to the differ ence between the upward force and the weight of the bottle. The upward force exerted by the water on the bottle is known as upthrust or buoyant force. In fact, all objects experience a force of buoyancy when they are immersed in a fluid. The magnitude of this buoyant force depends on the density of the fluid. 9.5.3 WHY OBJECTS FLOAT OR SINK WHEN PLACED ON THE SURFACE OF WATER? Let us do the following activities to arrive at an answer for the above question. Activity ______________ 9.5 • Take a beaker filled with water . • Take an ir on nail and place it on the surface of the water . • Observe what happens. The nail sinks. The for ce due to the gravitational attraction of the earth on the iron nail pulls it downwar ds. Ther e is an upthrust of water on the nail, which pushes it upwards. But the downwar d force acting on the nail is greater than the upthrust of water on the nail. So it sinks (Fig. 9.5). exert pressure on the base and walls of the container in which they are enclosed. Pressure exerted in any confined mass of fluid is transmitted undiminished in all directions. 9.5.2 BUOYANCY Have you ever had a swim in a pool and felt lighter? Have you ever drawn water fr om a well and felt that the bucket of water is heavier when it is out of the water? Have you ever wondered why a ship made of iron and steel does not sink in sea water, but while the same amount of iron and steel in the form of a sheet would sink? These questions can be answered by taking buoyancy in consideration. Let us understand the meaning of buoyancy by doing an activity. Activity ______________ 9.4 • Take an empty plastic bottle. Close the mouth of the bottle with an airtight stopper . Put it in a bucket filled with water . Y ou see that the bottle floats. • Push the bottle into the water. You feel an upward push. Try to push it further down. You will find it difficult to push deeper and deeper. This indicates that water exerts a force on the bottle in the upward dir ection. The upwar d for ce exerted by the water goes on increasing as the bottle is pushed deeper till it is completely immersed. • Now, r elease the bottle. It bounces back to the surface. • Does the force due to the gravitational attraction of the earth act on this bottle? If so, why doesn’t the bottle stay immersed in water after it is released? How can you immerse the bottle in water? The for ce due to the gravitational attraction of the earth acts on the bottle in the downwar d dir ection. So the bottle is pulled downwards. But the water exerts an upward force on the bottle. Thus, the bottle is pushed upwards. We have learnt that weight of an object is the force due to gravitational attraction of the earth. When the bottle is immersed, the upward force exerted by the Fig. 9.5: An iron nail sinks and a cork floats when placed on the surface of water. Reprint 2025-26
exert pressure on the base and walls of the — water on the bottle is greater than its weight. container in which they are enclosed. Pressure — Therefore it rises up when released. exerted in any confined mass of fluid is To keep the bottle completely immersed, transmitted undiminished in all directions. the upward force on the bottle due to water must be balanced. This can be achieved by 9.5.2 BUOYANCY an externally applied force acting downwards. This force must at least be equal to the Have you ever had a swim in a pool and felt difference between the upward force and the lighter? Have you ever drawn water from a weight of the bottle. well and felt that the bucket of water is heavier The upward force exerted by the water on when it is out of the water? Have you ever the bottle is known as upthrust or buoyant wondered why a ship made of iron and steel force. In fact, all objects experience a force of does not sink in sea water, but while the same buoyancy when they are immersed in a fluid. amount of iron and steel in the form ofa sheet — The magnitude of this buoyant force depends would sink? These questions can be answered on the density of the fluid. by taking buoyancy in consideration. Let us understand the meaning of buoyancy by 9.5.3) WHY OBJECTS FLOAT OR SINK doing an activity, WHEN PLACED ON THE SURFACE OF Activity 9.4 WATER? * ‘Take an empty plastic bottle. Close Let us do the following activities to arrive at the mouth of the bottle with an an answer for the above question. airtight stopper. Put it'in a bucket filled with water. You see that the Activity 9.5 bottle floats. . Push the bottle into the water. You feel . Take a beaker filled with water. an upward push. Try to push it further . Take an iron nail and place it on the down, You will find it difficult to push surface of the water. deeper and deeper. This indicates that « Observe what happens. water exerts a force on the bottle in the upward direction. The upward force The nail sinks. The force due to the exerted by the water goes on increasing gravitational attraction of the earth on the as the bottle is pushed deeper ull it is iron nail pulls it downwards. There is an completely immersed. upthrust of water on the nail, which pushes * Now, release the bottle. It bounces it upwards. But the downward force acting back to the surface. oo on the nail is greater than the upthrust of ° Does the force due to the gravitational water on the nail. So it sinks (Fig. 9.5) attraction of the earth act on this . . ome bottle? Ifso, why doesn't the bottle stay ee eee immersed in water after it is released? Len ~ ~~ 5 How can you immerse the bottle in Kr ee nee water? ‘ The force due to the gravitational @ attraction of the earth acts on the bottle in the downward direction. So the bottle is pulled downwards. But the water exerts an upward force on the bottle. Thus, the bottle is \ / pushed upwards. We have learnt that weight we Lee of an object is the force due to gravitational attraction of the earth. When the bottle is Pig. 9.5: Aniron nail sinks and a cork floats when immersed, the upward force exerted by the : placed on the surface of water. 108 Science. : Reprint 2025-26

[Page 10]
GRAVITATION 109 • Observe what happens to elongation of the string or the r eading on the balance. You will find that the elongation of the string or the reading of the balance decreases as the stone is gradually lowered in the water. However, no further change is observed once the stone gets fully immersed in the water. What do you infer from the decrease in the extension of the string or the reading of the spring balance? We know that the elongation produced in the string or the spring balance is due to the weight of the stone. Since the extension decreases once the stone is lowered in water, it means that some force acts on the stone in upward direction. As a result, the net force on the string decreases and hence the elongation also decr eases. As discussed earlier , this upward force exerted by water is known as the force of buoyancy. What is the magnitude of the buoyant force experienced by a body? Is it the same in all fluids for a given body? Do all bodies in a given fluid experience the same buoyant force? The answer to these questions is contained in Archimedes’ principle, stated as follows: Activity ______________ 9.6 • Take a beaker filled with water . • Take a piece of cork and an iron nail of equal mass. • Place them on the surface of water. • Observe what happens. The cork floats while the nail sinks. This happens because of the dif ference in their densities. The density of a substance is defined as the mass per unit volume. The density of cork is less than the density of water. This means that the upthrust of water on the cork is greater than the weight of the cork. So it floats (Fig. 9.5). The density of an iron nail is more than the density of water . This means that the upthrust of water on the iron nail is less than the weight of the nail. So it sinks. Therefore objects of density less than that of a liquid float on the liquid. The objects of density greater than that of a liquid sink in the liquid. uestions 1. Why is it difficult to hold a school bag having a strap made of a thin and strong string? 2. What do you mean by buoyancy? 3. Why does an object float or sink when placed on the sur face of water? 9.6 Archimedes’ Principle Activity ______________ 9.7 • Take a piece of stone and tie it to one end of a rubber string or a spring balance. • Suspend the stone by holding the balance or the string as shown in Fig. 9.6 (a). • Note the elongation of the string or the reading on the spring balance due to the weight of the stone. • Now, slowly dip the stone in the water in a container as shown in Fig. 9.6 (b). Fig. 9.6: (a) Observe the elongation of the rubber string due to the weight of a piece of stone suspended from it in air. (b) The elongation decr eases as the stone is immersed in water. (a) (b) Q Reprint 2025-26
Activity 9 ; —_ ¢ ‘Take a heaker filled with water. _ \y e Take a piece of cork and an iron nail of equal mass. . Place them on the surface of water. . Observe what happens. YT | | The cork floats while the nail sinks. This B happens because of the difference in their densities. The density of a substance is - defined as the mass per unit volume. The fa) density of cork is less than the density of water. This means that the upthrust of water Z on the cork is greater than the weight of the ty cork, So it floats (Fig. 9.5). wy The density of an iron nail is more than the density of water. This means that the Fig. 9.6: fa} Observe the elongation of the rubber upthrust of water on the iron nail is less than string due fo the weight ofa piece of stone . + suspended froin it in air. (b) The elongation the weight of the nail. So it sinks. decreases as the stone is inminersed Therefore objects of density less than that in water. of a liquid float on the liquid. The objects of density greater than that of a liquid sink in e = QOhserve what happens to clongation the liquid. of the string or the reading on the halance. (" Westin You will find that the elongation of the string \ 1. Whvis it ditlicult to hold a school or the reading of the balance decreases as the | bag having a strap made of a thin stone is gradually lowered in the water. However, and strong string? no further change is observed once the stone 19 What do vou mean by buovancv? gets fully immersed in the water. What do you UJ 3 Why does an object float or sink infer from the decrease in the extension of the when placed on the surtace ot string or the reading of the spring balance? water? We know that the elongation produced in the string or the spring balance is due to the 9.6 Archimedes’ Principle weight of the stone. Since the extension decreases once the stone is lowered in water, Activit 9.7 it means that some force acts on the stone in y —________ 7. upward direction. As a result, the net force on * Take a piece of stone and tie it to one the string decreases and hence the elongation end of a rubber string or a spring also decreases. As discussed earlier, this balance. upward force exerted by water is known as e Suspend the stone by holding the the force of buoyancy. me oe tah the string as shown in What is the magnitude of the buoyant . Note the elongation of the string or force experienced by a body? Is it the same the reading on the spring balance due in all fluids for a given body? Do all bodies to the weight of the stone. in a given fluid experience the same buoyant . Now, slowly dip the stone in the water force? The answer to these questions is in a container as shown in contained in Archimedes’ principle, stated as Fig. 9.6 (b). follows: GRAVITATION 109 Reprint 2025-26 :