[Page 1]
SCIENCE100 We have learnt about the motion of objects and force as the cause of motion. We have learnt that a force is needed to change the speed or the direction of motion of an object. We always observe that an object dropped from a height falls towards the earth. We know that all the planets go around the Sun. The moon goes around the earth. In all these cases, there must be some force acting on the objects, the planets and on the moon. Isaac Newton could grasp that the same force is responsible for all these. This force is called the gravitational force. In this chapter we shall learn about gravitation and the universal law of gravitation. We shall discuss the motion of objects under the influence of gravitational force on the earth. W e shall study how the weight of a body varies fr om place to place. We shall also discuss the conditions for objects to float in liquids. 9.1 Gravitation We know that the moon goes around the earth. An object when thrown upwards, reaches a certain height and then falls downwards. It is said that when Newton was sitting under a tree, an apple fell on him. The fall of the apple made Newton start thinking. He thought that: if the earth can attract an apple, can it not attract the moon? Is the force the same in both cases? He conjectured that the same type of force is responsible in both the cases. He argued that at each point of its orbit, the moon falls towards the earth, instead of going off in a straight line. So, it must be attracted by the earth. But we do not really see the moon falling towards the earth. Let us try to understand the motion of the moon by recalling activity 7.11. Activity ______________ 9.1 • Take a piece of thread. • Tie a small stone at one end. Hold the other end of the thread and whirl it round, as shown in Fig. 9.1. • Note the motion of the stone. • Release the thread. • Again, note the direction of motion of the stone. Fig. 9.1: A stone describing a circular path with a velocity of constant magnitude. Before the thread is released, the stone moves in a circular path with a certain speed and changes direction at every point. The change in direction involves change in velocity or acceleration. The force that causes this acceleration and keeps the body moving along the circular path is acting towards the centre. This force is called the centripetal (meaning ‘centre-seeking’) force. 9 GGG GGRAVITATIONRAVITATIONRAVITATIONRAVITATIONRAVITATION C hapter Reprint 2025-26
J ee C hapter 9 5. wresunc GRAVITATION Let us try to understand the motion of the We have learnt about the motion of objects and moon by recalling activity 7.11. force as the cause of motion. We have learnt that a force is needed to change the speed or Activity 9.1 the direction of motion of an object. We always . ; . observe that an object dropped from a height * Take a piece of thread. falls towards the earth. We know that all the ° Tie a small stone at one end. Hold the q 4 other end of the thread and whirl it planets go around the Sun. The moon goes round, as shown in Fig, 9.1. around the earth. In all these cases, there must ° Note the motion of the stone. be some force acting on the objects, the planets © — Release the thread. and on the moon. Isaac Newton could grasp . Again, note the direction of motion of that the same force is responsible for all these. the stone. This force is called the gravitational force. In this chapter we shall learn about peso rrr tee gravitation and the universal law of a Te . gravitation. We shall discuss the motion of re 7 se) objects under the influence of gravitational ? ~ i force on the earth. We shall study how the ‘ PA “ weight of a body varies from place to place. 4 By / We shall also discuss the conditions for sa y ) oo objects to float in liquids. ~. weet” 9.1 Gravitation We know that the moon goes around the earth. ot An object when thrown upwards, reaches a certain height and then falls downwards. It is said that when Newton was sitting under a tree. Fig. 9.1: Astone describing a circular path with a an apple fell on him. The fall of the apple made velocity of constant magnitude. Newton start thinking. He thought that: if the earth can attract an apple, can it not attract Before the thread is released, the stone the moon? Is the force the same in both cases? moves in a circular path with a certain speed He conjectured that the same type of force is and changes direction at every point. responsible in both the cases. He argued that = The change in direction involves change in at each point of its orbit, the moon falls — velocity or acceleration. The force that causes towards the earth, instead of going off ina this acceleration and keeps the body moving straight line. So, it must be attracted by the — along the circular path is acting towards earth. But we do not really see the moon falling the centre. This force is called the towards the earth. centripetal (meaning ‘centre-seeking’) force. Reprint 2025-26

[Page 2]
GRAVITATION 101 9.1.1 UNIVERSAL LAW OF GRAVITATION Every object in the universe attracts every other object with a force which is proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional to the squar e of the distance between them. The for ce is along the line joining the centres of two objects. In the absence of this force, the stone flies off along a straight line. This straight line will be a tangent to the circular path. More to know Tangent to a circle A straight line that meets the circle at one and only one point is called a tangent to the cir cle. Straight line ABC is a tangent to the cir cle at point B. The motion of the moon around the earth is due to the centripetal force. The centripetal force is provided by the for ce of attraction of the earth. If there wer e no such for ce, the moon would pursue a unifor m straight line motion. It is seen that a falling apple is attracted towards the earth. Does the apple attract the earth? If so, we do not see the earth moving towards an apple. Why? According to the third law of motion, the apple does attract the earth. But accor ding to the second law of motion, for a given force, acceleration is inversely pr oportional to the mass of an object [Eq. (8.4)]. The mass of an apple is negligibly small compared to that of the earth. So, we do not see the earth moving towards the apple. Extend the same argument for why the earth does not move towards the moon. In our solar system, all the planets go around the Sun. By ar guing the same way, we can say that there exists a force between the Sun and the planets. From the above facts Newton concluded that not only does the earth attract an apple and the moon, but all objects in the universe attract each other. This force of attraction between objects is called the gravitational force. G 2 Mm F = d Fig. 9.2: The gravitational force between two uniform objects is directed along the line joining their centres. Let two objects A and B of masses M and m lie at a distance d from each other as shown in Fig. 9.2. Let the force of attraction between two objects be F . According to the universal law of gravitation, the for ce between two objects is directly proportional to the product of their masses. That is, F∝ M × m (9.1) And the force between two objects is inversely proportional to the squar e of the distance between them, that is, ∝ 2 1F d (9.2) Combining Eqs. (10.1) and (10.2), we get F ∝ 2 ×M m d (9.3) or, G 2 M × m F = d (9.4) where G is the constant of proportionality and is called the universal gravitation constant. By multiplying crosswise, Eq. (9.4) gives F × d 2 = G M × m Reprint 2025-26
In the absence of this force, the stone flies off — 9.1.1) UNIVERSAL LAW OF GRAVITATION along a straight line. This straight line will be a tangent to the circular path. Every object in the universe attracts every other object with a force which is proportional Tangent to a circle to the product of their masses and inversely " proportional to the square of the distance A b c between them. The force is along the line joining the centres of two objects. 2 ° S =< A B g s Astraight line that meets the circle at one and only one point is called a F=G6 Mm tangent to the circle. Straight line a ABC is a tangent to the circle at point B. Fig. 9.2: The gravitational force betweer two uniform objects is directed along the line The motion of the moon around the earth Joining their centres, is due to the centripetal force. The centripetal force is provided by the force of attraction of Let two objects A and B of masses Mand the earth. If there were no such force, the mlie ata distance dfrom each other as shown moon would pursue a uniform straight line — in Fig. 9.2. Let the force of attraction between motion. two objects be F. According to the universal It is seen that a falling apple is attracted law of gravitation, the force between two towards the earth. Does the apple attract the objects is directly proportional to the product earth? If so, we do not see the earth moving — of their masses. That is. towards an apple. Why’? Foo M xa 9.1) According to the third law of motion, the and the force between two objects is inversely apple does attract the earth. But according proportional to the square of the distance to the second law of motion, for a given force. between them, that is. acceleration is inversely proportional to the mass of an object (Eq. (8.4)]. The mass of an l apple is negligibly small compared to that of Pe we {9.2) the earth. So. we do not see the earth moving ‘ towards the apple. Extend the same argument Combining Eqs. (10.1) and (10.2), we get for why the earth does not move towards the moon. Mxim In our solar system, all the planets go Fo a? {9.3) around the Sun. By arguing the same way. we can say that there exists a force between ., Mxm the Sun and the planets. From the above facts OF. PEG r {9.4) Newton concluded that not only does the ‘ earth attract an apple and the moon, but all where Gis the constant of proportionality and objects in the universe attract each other. This is called the universal gravitation constant. force of attraction between objects is called By multiplying crosswise, Eq. (9.4) gives the gravitational force. Fxd?=GMxim GRAVITATION 101 Reprint 2025-26 :