[Page 11]
SCIENCE110 What you have learnt • The law of gravitation states that the force of attraction between any two objects is proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them. The law applies to objects anywhere in the universe. Such a law is said to be universal. • Gravitation is a weak force unless large masses are involved. • The force of gravity decreases with altitude. It also varies on the surface of the earth, decreasing from poles to the equator. • The weight of a body is the for ce with which the earth attracts it. • The weight is equal to the pr oduct of mass and acceleration due to gravity. • The weight may vary from place to place but the mass stays constant. When a body is immersed fully or partially in a fluid, it experiences an upward force that is equal to the weight of the fluid displaced by it. Now, can you explain why a further decrease in the elongation of the string was not observed in activity 9.7, as the stone was fully immersed in water? Archimedes was a Greek scientist. He discovered the principle, subsequently named after him, after noticing that the water in a bathtub overflowed when he stepped into it. He ran through the streets shouting “Eureka!”, which means “I have got it”. This knowledge helped him to determine the purity of the gold in the crown made for the king. His work in the field of Geometry and Mechanics made him famous. His understanding of levers, pulleys, wheels- and-axle helped the Greek army in its war with Roman army. Archimedes Q Archimedes’ principle has many applications. It is used in designing ships and submarines. Lactometers, which are used to determine the purity of a sample of milk and hydrometers used for determining density of liquids, are based on this principle. uestions 1. You find your mass to be 42 kg on a weighing machine. Is your mass more or less than 42 kg? 2. You have a bag of cotton and an iron bar, each indicating a mass of 100 kg when measured on a weighing machine. In reality, one is heavier than other . Can you say which one is heavier and why? Reprint 2025-26
When a body is immersed tilly or partially Archimedes’ principle has many ina thiid, it experiences an upward torce that — applications. It is used in designing ships and is equal to the weight of the fluid displaced — submarines. Lactometers, which are used to by it. determine the purity of a sample of milk and Now, can you explain why a further hydrometers used for determining density of decrease in the elongation of the string was liquids, are based on this principle. not observed in activity 9.7, as the stone was fully immersed in water? N) westions Archimedes was a Greek scientist. He h You find vour mass fo he 42 ke discovered the principle, subsequently named ona weighing machine. IS) pur seme after him, after noticing that Mass MOLE OF less than 42 kx: Ps wees the water in a bathtub | | 2. You havea bag ofcotton and an ws overflowed when he stepped U) iron bar. cach indicading a mass a\ EM into it. He ran through the of 100 kg when measurcd on a NS MM streets shouting “Eureka!, weighing machine. fn reality, EE. 3 " & which means “I have got it”. one is heavier than other. Can ee " “ae fd This knowledge helped him to You sav which onc is heavier aca ee detennine the purity of the and why? Archimedes gold in the crown made for the king. His work in the field of Geometry and Mechanics made him famous. His understanding of levers, pulleys. wheels- and-axle helped the Greek army in its war with Roman army. (dS What @ FA. you have SN ats As, 1S Fy On b> = ae learnt — o ° The law of gravitation states that the force of attraction between any two objects is proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them. The law applies to objects anywhere in the universe. Such a law is said to be universal. ° Gravitation is a weak force unless large masses are involved. e The foree of gravity decreases with altitude. It also varies on the surface of the earth, decreasing from poles to the equator. ° The weight of a body is the force with which the earth attracts it. ° The weight is equal to the product of mass and acceleration due to gravity. ° The weight may vary from place to place but the mass stays constant. 110 Sewer, Reprint 2025-26

[Page 12]
GRAVITATION 111 • All objects experience a force of buoyancy when they are immersed in a fluid. • Objects having density less than that of the liquid in which they are immersed, float on the sur face of the liquid. If the density of the object is more than the density of the liquid in which it is immersed then it sinks in the liquid. E xercises 1. How does the force of gravitation between two objects change when the distance between them is reduced to half ? 2. Gravitational force acts on all objects in proportion to their masses. Why then, a heavy object does not fall faster than a light object? 3. What is the magnitude of the gravitational for ce between the earth and a 1 kg object on its surface? (Mass of the earth is 6 × 1024 kg and radius of the earth is 6.4 × 106 m.) 4. The earth and the moon ar e attracted to each other by gravitational force. Does the earth attract the moon with a force that is greater or smaller or the same as the force with which the moon attracts the earth? Why? 5. If the moon attracts the earth, why does the earth not move towards the moon? 6. What happens to the force between two objects, if (i) the mass of one object is doubled? (ii) the distance between the objects is doubled and tripled? (iii) the masses of both objects are doubled? 7. What is the importance of universal law of gravitation? 8. What is the acceleration of free fall? 9. What do we call the gravitational force between the earth and an object? 10. Amit buys few grams of gold at the poles as per the instruction of one of his friends. He hands over the same when he meets him at the equator. Will the friend agree with the weight of gold bought? If not, why? [Hint : The value of g is gr eater at the poles than at the equator.] 11. Why will a sheet of paper fall slower than one that is crumpled into a ball? 12. Gravitational force on the sur face of the moon is only 1 6 as strong as gravitational force on the earth. What is the weight in newtons of a 10 kg object on the moon and on the earth? Reprint 2025-26
° All objects experience a force of buoyancy when they are immersed in a fluid. e Objects having density less than that of the liquid in which they are immersed, float on the surface of the liquid. If the density of the object is more than the density of the liquid in which it is immersed then it sinks in the liquid. Ld i Exercises ro : 1. How does the force of gravitation between two objects change i ' a when the distanee between them is reduced to half ? <S w, 2. Gravitational foree acts on all objects in proportion to their me masses. Why then, a heavy object does not fall faster than a light object? 3. What is the magnitude of the gravitational force between the earth and a | kg object on its surface’? (Mass of the earth is 6 x 107" kg and radius of the earth is 6.4 x 10° m.) 4. The earth and the moon are attracted to cach other by gravitational foree. Does the earth attract the moon with a force that is greater or smaller or the same as the force with which the moon attracts the earth? Why? 5. If the moon attracts the earth, why does the earth not move towards the moon? 6. What happens to the force between two objects. if (i) the mass of one object is doubled? (ii) the distance between the objects is doubled and tripled’? (iii) the masses of both objects are doubled’? 7. What is the importance of universal law of gravitation? 8. What is the acceleration of free fall? 9. What do we call the gravitational force between the earth and an object? 10. Amit buys few grams of gold at the poles as per the instruction of one of his friends. He hands over the same when he meets him at the equator. Will the friend agree with the weight of gold bought? If not, why? [Hint: The value of g is greater at the poles than at the equator.] 11. Why will a sheet of paper fall slower than one that is crumpled into a ball? . . I 12. Gravitational force on the surface of the moon is only 5 38 strong as gravitational force on the earth. What is the weight in newtons of a 10 kg object on the moon and on the earth? Gravrianon i Reprint 2025-26

[Page 13]
SCIENCE112 13. A ball is thrown vertically upwards with a velocity of 49 m/s. Calculate (i) the maximum height to which it rises, (ii) the total time it takes to return to the surface of the earth. 14. A stone is r eleased from the top of a tower of height 19.6 m. Calculate its final velocity just before touching the ground. 15. A stone is thrown vertically upward with an initial velocity of 40 m/s. Taking g = 10 m/s 2, find the maximum height reached by the stone. What is the net displacement and the total distance covered by the stone? 16. Calculate the force of gravitation between the earth and the Sun, given that the mass of the earth = 6 × 1024 kg and of the Sun = 2 × 10 30 kg. The average distance between the two is 1.5 × 1011 m. 17. A stone is allowed to fall from the top of a tower 100 m high and at the same time another stone is projected vertically upwards from the ground with a velocity of 25 m/s. Calculate when and where the two stones will meet. 18. A ball thrown up vertically returns to the thrower after 6 s. Find (a) the velocity with which it was thrown up, (b) the maximum height it reaches, and (c) its position after 4 s. 19. In what direction does the buoyant force on an object immersed in a liquid act? 20. Why does a block of plastic released under water come up to the surface of water? 21. The volume of 50 g of a substance is 20 cm3. If the density of water is 1 g cm –3, will the substance float or sink? 22. The volume of a 500 g sealed packet is 350 cm 3. Will the packet float or sink in water if the density of water is 1 g cm–3? What will be the mass of the water displaced by this packet? Reprint 2025-26
13. A ball is thrown vertically upwards with a velocity of 49 m/s. Caleulate (i) the maximum height to which it rises, (ii) the total time it takes to return to the surface of the earth. 14. Astone is released from the top of a tower of height 19.6 m. Calculate its final velocity just before touching the ground. 15. A stone is thrown vertically upward with an initial velocity of 40 m/s. Taking g = 10 m/s’, find the maximum height reached by the stone. What is the net displacement and the total distance covered by the stone? 16. Calculate the force of gravitation between the earth and the Sun, given that the mass of the earth = 6 x 10" kg and of the Sun = 2 x 10" kg. The average distance between the two is 1.5 x 101 m. 17. Astone is allowed to fall from the top of a tower 100 m high and at the same time another stone is projected vertically upwards from the ground with a velocity of 25 m/s. Calculate when and where the two stones will meet. 18. A ball thrown up vertically returns to the thrower after 6 s. Find (a) the velocity with which it was thrown up, (b) the maximum height it reaches, and (ce) its position after 4 s. 19. In what direction does the buoyant force on an object immersed in a liquid act? 20. Why does a block of plastic released under water come up to the surface of water? 21. The volume of 50 g of a substance is 20 cm’. If the density of water is 1 g em”, will the substance float or sink? 22. The volume of a 500 g sealed packet is 350 em*. Will the packet float or sink in water if the density of water is 1 g env"? What will be the mass of the water displaced by this packet? 112 Sewxer, Reprint 2025-26