SCIENCE54 • Was there a darkly coloured, spherical or oval, dot-like structure near the centre of each cell? This structure is called nucleus. W ere ther e similar structures in onion peel cells? The nucleus has a double layered covering called nuclear membrane. The nuclear membrane has pores which allow the transfer of material fr om inside the nucleus to its outside, that is, to the cytoplasm (which we will talk about in section 5.2.4). The nucleus contains chr omosomes, which are visible as r od-shaped structur es only when the cell is about to divide. Chr omosomes contain infor mation for inheritance of characters from parents to next generation in the for m of DNA (Deoxyribo Nucleic Acid) molecules. Chr omosomes are composed of DNA and protein. DNA molecules contain the infor mation necessary for constructing and organising cells. Functional segments of DNA are called genes. In a cell which is not dividing, this DNA is present as part of chr omatin material. Chromatin material is visible as entangled mass of thread like structures. Whenever the cell is about to divide, the chromatin material gets organised into chromosomes. The nucleus plays a central role in cellular reproduction, the process by which a single cell divides and for ms two new cells. It also plays a crucial part, along with the environment, in determining the way the cell will develop and what for m it will exhibit at maturity, by directing the chemical activities of the cell. In some or ganisms like bacteria, the nuclear r egion of the cell may be poorly defined due to the absence of a nuclear membrane. Such an undefined nuclear region containing only nucleic acids is called a nucleoid. Such organisms, whose cells lack a nuclear membrane, are called prokaryotes (Pro = primitive or primary; karyote ≈ karyon = nucleus). Or ganisms with cells having a nuclear membrane are called eukaryotes. Prokaryotic cells (see Fig. 5.4) also lack most of the other cytoplasmic organelles present in eukaryotic cells. Many of the functions of such organelles are also performed by poorly or ganised parts of the cytoplasm (see section 5.2.4). The chlorophyll in photosynthetic pr okaryotic bacteria is associated with membranous vesicles (bag like structures) but not with plastids as in eukaryotic cells (see section 5.2.5). RibosomesPlasma membrane Cell wall Nucleoid Fig. 5.4: Prokaryotic cell 5.2.4 CYTOPLASM When we look at the temporary mounts of onion peel as well as human cheek cells, we can see a lar ge region of each cell enclosed by the cell membrane. This r egion takes up very little stain. It is called the cytoplasm. The cytoplasm is the fluid content inside the plasma membrane. It also contains many specialised cell or ganelles. Each of these organelles performs a specific function for the cell. Cell or ganelles ar e enclosed by membranes. In pr okaryotes, beside the absence of a defined nuclear r egion, the membrane-bound cell or ganelles ar e also absent. On the other hand, the eukaryotic cells have nuclear membrane as well as membrane-enclosed or ganelles. The significance of membranes can be illustrated with the example of viruses. Viruses lack any membranes and hence do not show characteristics of life until they enter a living body and use its cell machinery to multiply. Reprint 2025-26
e = Was there a darkly coloured, spherical present in eukaryotic cells. Many of the or oval, dot-like structure near the functions of such organelles are also centre of each cell? This structure is performed by poorly organised parts of the called nucleus. Were there similar cytoplasm (see section 5.2.4). The chlorophyll structures in onion peel cells? in photosynthetic prokaryotic bacteria is The nucleus has a double layered covering — associated with membranous vesicles (bag called nuclear membrane. The nuclear — like structures) but not with plastids as in membrane has pores which allow the transfer eukaryotic cells (see section 5.2.5). of material from inside the nucleus to its outside, that is, to the cytoplasm (which we will talk about in section 5.2.4). Plasma Ribosomes The nucleus contains chromosomes, tnembrane \ te, which are visible as rod-shaped structures \ Oo > only when the cell is about to divide. Cell wall 8 7 ee : r Chromosomes contain information for NYO . nary inheritance of characters from parents to next on Se Nuclead generation in the form of DNA (Deoxyribo a2* ye Nucleic Acid) molecules. Chromosomes are ~ composed of DNA and protein. DNA molecules contain the information necessary for constructing and organising cells. Functional Fig. 5.4: Prokaryotic cell segments of DNA are called genes. In a cell which is not dividing, this DNA is present as a . part of chromatin material. Chromatin 5.2.4 CYTOPLASM material is visible as entangled mass of thread like structures. Whenever the cell is about to When we look at the temporary mounts of divide. the chromatin material gets organised OM#ON peel as well as human cheek cells, we into chromosomes. , j can see a large region of each cell enclosed The nucleus plays a central role in cellular — by the cell membrane. This region takes up reproduction, the process by which a single Very little stain. It is called the cytoplasm. cell divides and forms two new cells. It also The cytoplasm is the fluid content inside the plays a crucial part, along with the plasma membrane. It also contains many environment, in determining the way the cell specialised cell organelles. Each of these will develop and what form it will exhibit at. OT8anelles performs a specific function for the maturity, by directing the chemical activities cell. of the cell. Cell organelles are enclosed by In some organisms like bacteria, the © Membranes. In prokaryotes, beside the nuclear region of the cell may be poorly absence of a defined nuclear region, the defined due to the absence of a nuclear Membrane-bound cell organelles are also membrane. Such an undefined nuclear region — absent. On the other hand. the eukaryotic containing only nucleic acids is called a cells have nuclear membrane as well as nucleoid. Such organisms, whose cells lack — membrane-enclosed organelles. a nuclear membrane, are called prokaryotes The significance of membranes can be (Pro = primitive or primary; karyote = karyon illustrated with the example of viruses. = nucleus). Organisms with cells having a Viruses lack any membranes and hence do nuclear membrane are called eukaryotes. not show characteristics of life until they enter Prokaryotic cells (see Fig. 5.4) also lack — a living body and use its cell machinery to most of the other cytoplasmic organelles — multiply. 54 Science. : Reprint 2025-26