SCIENCE52 52525252 The movement of water across the plasma membrane is also affected by the amount of substance dissolved in water. Thus, osmosis is the net diffusion of water across a selectively permeable membrane toward a higher solute concentration. What will happen if we put an animal cell or a plant cell into a solution of sugar or salt in water? One of the following thr ee things could happen: 1. If the medium surrounding the cell has a higher water concentration than the cell, meaning that the outside solution is very dilute, the cell will gain water by osmosis. Such a solution is known as a hypotonic solution. Water molecules are free to pass across the cell membrane in both directions, but more water will come into the cell than will leave. The net (overall) result is that water enters the cell. The cell is likely to swell up. 2. If the medium has exactly the same water concentration as the cell, there will be no net movement of water across the cell membrane. Such a solution is known as an isotonic solution. Water crosses the cell membrane in both directions, but the amount going in is the same as the amount going out, so there is no overall movement of water. The cell will stay the same size. 3. If the medium has a lower concentration of water than the cell, meaning that it is a very concentrated solution, the cell will lose water by osmosis. Such a solution is known as a hypertonic solution. Again, water cr osses the cell membrane in both directions, but this time more water leaves the cell than enters it. Therefore the cell will shrink. Thus, osmosis is a special case of diffusion through a selectively permeable membrane. Now let us try out the following activity: Activity ______________ 5.3 (a) Remove the shell of an egg by dissolving it in dilute hydrochloric acid. The shell is mostly calcium carbonate. A thin outer skin now encloses the egg. Put the egg in pure water and observe after 5 minutes. What do we observe? The egg swells because water passes into it by osmosis. (b) Place a similar de-shelled egg in a concentrated salt solution and observe for 5 minutes. The egg shrinks. Why? Water passes out of the egg solution into the salt solution because the salt solution is more concentrated. We can also try a similar activity with dried raisins or apricots. Activity ______________ 5.4 • Put dried raisins or apricots in plain water and leave them for some time. Then place them into a concentrated solution of sugar or salt. Y ou will observe the following: (a) Each gains water and swells when placed in water . (b) However , when placed in the concentrated solution it loses water, and consequently shrinks. Unicellular freshwater organisms and most plant cells tend to gain water thr ough osmosis. Absorption of water by plant r oots is also an example of osmosis. Thus, diffusion is important in exhange of gases and water in the life of a cell. In additions to this, the cell also obtains nutrition fr om its envir onment. Dif ferent molecules move in and out of the cell through a type of transport r equiring use of energy. The plasma membrane is flexible and is made up of or ganic molecules called lipids and proteins. However, we can observe the structur e of the plasma membrane only through an electr on microscope. The flexibility of the cell membrane also enables the cell to engulf in food and other material from its external environment. Such processes are known as endocytosis. Amoeba acquires its food through such processes. Reprint 2025-26
The movement of water across the plasma Activity 5.3 membrane is also affected by the TTT amount of substance dissolved in water. Thus, {a} Remove the shell of an egg by osmosis is the net diffusion of water across a dissolving it in dilute hydrochloric selectively permeable membrane toward a acid. The shell is mostly caleium earbonate. A thin outer skin now higher solute concentration, encloses the egg, Put the egg in pure What will happen if we put an animal cell water and observe after 5 minutes. or a plant cell into a solution of sugar or salt What do we observe? in water? The epg swells because water passes One of the following three things could into it by osmosis. happen: (bh) Place a similar de-shelled egg in a concentrated salt solution and ohserve 1. Ifthe medium surrounding the cell has = oe on - ne - - for 5 minutes. The egg shrinks. Why? a higher water concentration than the Water passes out of the egg solution cell, meaning that the outside solution into the salt solution because the salt is very dilute. the cell will gain water by solution 1s more concentrated. osmosis. Such a solution is known as We can also try a similar activity with dried a hypotonic solution. raisins or apricots. Water molecules are free to pass Activity 5.4 across the cell membrane in both TT directions, but more water will come ¢ Put dned raisins or apricots in plain into the cell than will leave. The net water and leave them for some time. Then place them into a concentrated (overall) result is that water enters the solution of sugar or salt. You will cell. The cell is likely to swell up. observe the following: 2. If the medium has exactly the same (a) Each gains water and swells water concentration as the cell. there when placed in water, - (b) However, when placed in the will be no net movement of water across concentrated solution it loses the cell membrane. Such a solution is water, and consequently shrinks. known as an isotonic solution, Unicellular freshwater organisms and Water crosses the cell membrane in most plant cells tend to gain water through both directions, but the amount going — osmosis. Absorption of water by plant roots in is the same as the amount going out, —_ 1 also an example of osmosis. so there is no overall movement of Thus, diffusion is important in exhange water. The cell will stay the same size. of gases and water in the life of a cell. In ‘ , additions to this, the cell also obtains 3. If the medium has a lower nutrition from its environment. Different concentration of water than the cell, molecules move in and out of the cell meaning that it is a very concentrated — through a type of transport requiring use solution, the cell will lose water by — of energy. osmosis. Such a solution is known as The plasma membrane is flexible and is a hypertonic solution. made up of organic molecules called lipids Again. water crosses the cell and proteins. However, we can observe the Bain. . structure of the plasma membrane only membrane in both directions, but this . - through an electron microscope. lime more water leaves the cell than The flexibility of the cell membrane also enters it, Therefore the cell will shrink. enables the cell to engulf in food and other Thus, osmosis is a special case of diffusion material from its external environment. Such through a selectively permeable membrane. processes are known as endocytosis. Amoeba Now let us try out the following activity: acquires its food through such processes. 52 Sewer : Reprint 2025-26