While examining a thin slice of cork, Robert Hooke saw that the cork r esembled the structure of a honeycomb consisting of many little compartments. Cork is a substance which comes fr om the bark of a tr ee. This was in the year 1665 when Hooke made this chance observation through a self-designed microscope. Robert Hooke called these boxes cells. Cell is a Latin word for ‘a little room’. This may seem to be a very small and insignificant incident but it is very important in the history of science. This was the very first time that someone had observed that living things appear to consist of separate units. The use of the word ‘cell’ to describe these units is being used till this day in biology. Let us find out about cells. 5.1 What are Living Organisms Made Up of? Activity ______________ 5.1 • Let us take a small piece from an onion bulb. With the help of a pair of forceps, we can peel of f the skin (called epidermis) from the concave side (inner layer) of the onion. This layer can be put immediately in a watch-glass containing water. This will prevent the peel from getting folded or getting dry. What do we do with this peel? • Let us take a glass slide, put a drop of water on it and transfer a small piece of the peel from the watch glass to the slide. Make sur e that the peel is perfectly flat on the slide. A thin camel hair paintbrush might be necessary to help transfer the peel. Now we put a drop of safranin solution on this piece followed by a cover slip. Take care to avoid air bubbles while putting the cover slip with the help of a mounting needle. Ask your teacher for help. W e have prepared a temporary mount of onion peel. We can observe this slide under low power followed by high powers of a compound microscope. Fig. 5.1: Compound microscope What do we observe as we look through the lens? Can we draw the structur es that we are able to see thr ough the micr oscope, on an observation sheet? Does it look like Fig. 5.2? Eyepiece Coarse adjustment Fine adjustment Arm Objective lens Stage Swivel Mirror Base Body tube Clip Microscope slide Condenser Fig. 5.2: Cells of an onion peel 5 T TT TTHE HEHE HEHE F F F F FUNDAMENTALUNDAMENTALUNDAMENTALUNDAMENTALUNDAMENTAL U U U U UNIT NITNIT NITNIT OF OFOF OFOF L L L L LIFE IFEIFE IFEIFE C hapter Nucleus Cells Reprint 2025-26
me C hapter 5 THE FUNDAMENTAL UNIT oF LIFE While examining a thin slice of cork, Robert avoid air bubbles while putting the Hooke saw that the cork resembled the cover slip with the help of a mounting structure of a honeycomb consisting of many needle. Ask your teacher tor help. We little compartments. Cork is a substance onion peed We a emp ory Haan which comes from the bark of a tree. This under low power followed by high was in the year 1665 when Hooke made this powers of a compound microscope. chance observation through a self-designed microscope. Robert Hooke called these boxes LY eyemece cells. Cell is a Latin word for ‘a little room’. it . This may seem to be a very small and L insignificant incident but it is very important ‘| f: ho in the history of science. This was the very first Body tube «| Gi Coarse adjustinent time that someone had observed that living , iI | C2 vine aa . things appear to consist of separate units. The _ i nd he adjustarennt use of the word ‘cell’ to describe these units is cp : Object lens being used tll this day in biology. Microscope elle . gil: ee Let us find out about cells. ee Stage ; — ct G swivel Condenser “Ai 5.1 What are Living Organisms Fe Mime Made Up of? we Be Activity 5, 1 Pig. 5.1: Compound microscope ¢ Let us take a small piece from an onion What do we observe as we look through bulb. With the help ofa pair of forceps, the lens? Can we draw the structures that we can peel off the skin (called cee . . veers epidermis) from the concave side (inner we are able to see through the microscope, laver) of the onion. This layer can be on an observation sheet? Does it look like put immediately in a watch-glass Fig. 5.2? containing water. This will prevent the = rel rom geuing tla or seine dry. nani . 0 What do we do with this peel? ~~ KY ~ ¢ Let us take a glass slide. put a drop of Papeete EL Nucleus water on it and transfer a small piece - > of the peel from the watch glass to the Se Cells slide. Make sure that the peel is °° gnc <> perfectly flat on the slide. A thin camel . x hair paintbrush might he necessary to ae whe help transfer the peel. Now we put a 7 ” drop of safranin solution on this piece followed by a cover slip. Take care to Fig. 5.2: Cells ofan onion peel Reprint 2025-26