THE FUNDAMENTAL UNIT OF LIFE 51 The shape and size of cells are related to the specific function they perform. Some cells like Amoeba have changing shapes. In some cases the cell shape could be mor e or less fixed and peculiar for a particular type of cell; for example, nerve cells have a typical shape. Each living cell has the capacity to perform certain basic functions that ar e characteristic of all living for ms. How does a living cell per form these basic functions? We know that there is a division of labour in multicellular or ganisms such as human beings. This means that dif ferent parts of the human body perform different functions. The human body has a heart to pump blood, a stomach to digest food and so on. Similarly, division of labour is also seen within a single cell. In fact, each such cell has got certain specific components within it known as cell organelles. Each kind of cell or ganelle performs a special function, such as making new material in the cell, clearing up the waste material fr om the cell and so on. A cell is able to live and per for m all its functions because of these organelles. These organelles together constitute the basic unit called the cell. It is inter esting that all cells are found to have the same or ganelles, no matter what their function is or what organism they are found in. uestions 1. Who discovered cells, and how? 2. Why is the cell called the structural and functional unit of life? 5.2 What is a Cell Made Up of? What is the Structural Organisation of a Cell? We saw above that the cell has special components called organelles. How is a cell organised? If we study a cell under a microscope, we would come across three features in almost every cell; plasma membrane, nucleus and cytoplasm. All activities inside the cell and interactions of the cell with its envir onment are possible due to these features. Let us see how. 5.2.1 PLASMA MEMBRANE OR CELL MEMBRANE This is the outermost covering of the cell that separates the contents of the cell fr om its external environment. The plasma membrane allows or permits the entry and exit of some materials in and out of the cell. It also prevents movement of some other materials. The cell membrane, ther efore, is called a selectively permeable membrane. How does the movement of substances take place into the cell? How do substances move out of the cell? Some substances like carbon dioxide or oxygen can move acr oss the cell membrane by a process called diffusion. We have studied the process of dif fusion in earlier chapters. We saw that there is spontaneous movement of a substance fr om a r egion of high concentration to a r egion wher e its concentration is low. Something similar to this happens in cells when, for example, some substance like CO2 (which is cellular waste and r equires to be excreted out by the cell) accumulates in high concentrations inside the cell. In the cell’s external environment, the concentration of CO2 is low as compar ed to that inside the cell. As soon as ther e is a dif ference of concentration of CO2 inside and outside a cell, CO2 moves out of the cell, fr om a r egion of high concentration, to a r egion of low concentration outside the cell by the process of diffusion. Similarly, O 2 enters the cell by the pr ocess of dif fusion when the level or concentration of O2 inside the cell decreases. Thus, dif fusion plays an important r ole in gaseous exchange between the cells as well as the cell and its external environment. Water also obeys the law of diffusion. The movement of water molecules through such a selectively permeable membrane is called osmosis. Q Reprint 2025-26
The shape and size of cells are related to every cell: plasma membrane, nucleus and the specific function they perform. Some cells cytoplasm. All activities inside the cell and like Amoeba have changing shapes. In some interactions of the cell with its environment cases the cell shape could be more or less — are possible due to these features. Let us see fixed and peculiar fora particular type of cell: how. for example, nerve cells have a typical shape. Each living cell has the capacity to 5.2.1 PLASMA MEMBRANE OR CELL perform certain basic functions that are MEMBRANE characteristic of all living forms. How does ~~ “— a living cell perform these basic functions? This is the outermost covering of the cell that We know that there is a division of labour in separates the contents of the cell from its multicellular organisms such as human — external environment. The plasma membrane beings. This means that different parts of allows or permits the entry and exit of some the human hody perform different functions. — materials in and out of the cell. It also The human body has a heart to pump blood. prevents movement of some other materials. a stomach to digest food and so on. Similarly. The cell membrane, therefore, is called a division of labour is also seen within a single selectively permeable membrane. cell, In fact, each such cell has got certain How does the movement of substances specific components within it known as cell take place into the cell’? How do substances organelles. Each kind of cell organelle move out of the cell’? performs a special function, such as making Some substances like carbon dioxide or new material in the cell, clearing up the oxygen can move across the cell membrane waste material from the cell and so on. A bya process called diffusion. We have studied cell is able to live and perform all its the process of diffusion in earlier chapters. functions because of these organelles. These We saw that there is spontaneous movement organelles together constitute the basic unit of a substance from a region of high called the cell. It is interesting that all cells goneentration to a region where its are found to have the same organelles. nO gencentration is low. matter what their function is or what Something similar to this happens in cells organism they are found in. when. for example, some substance like CO, . {which is cellular waste and requires to be (1 westions excreted out by the cell) accumulates in high | 1. Who discovercd cells. and how? concentrations inside the cell. In the cell's 2 Why is the cell called the external environment, the concentration of saructuraland functional unit ot CO, Is low as compared to that inside the | life? cell. As soon as there is a difference of G concentration of CO, inside and outside a cell, i, CO, moves out of the cell. from a region of high concentration, to a region of low 5.2 What is a Cell Made Up of? concentration outside the cell by the process . of diffusion. Similarly, O, enters the cell by What is the Structural the process of diffusion when the level or Organisation of a Cell? concentration of o, inside the cell decreases, us, diffusion plays an important role in We saw above that the cell has special gaseous exchange between the cells as well components called organelles. How is a cell as the cell and its external environment. organised? Water also obeys the law of diffusion. The “Ifwe study a cell under a microscope. we movement of water molecules through such a would come across three features in almost selectively permeable membrane is called osmosis. Th, Puspasenta Use or Lire 51 Reprint 2025-26 :