THE FUNDAMENTAL UNIT OF LIFE 55 uestion 1. Fill in the gaps in the following table illustrating dif ferences between pr okaryotic and eukaryotic cells. Prokaryotic Cell Eukaryotic Cell 1. Size : generally 1. Size: generally small ( 1-10 µ m) large ( 5-100 µ m) 1 µ m = 10–6 m 2. Nuclear region: 2. Nuclear region: well defined and surrounded by a and known as__ nuclear membrane 3. Chromosome: 3. More than one single chromosome 4. Membrane-bound 4. cell organelles absent 5.2.5 CELL ORGANELLES Every cell has a membrane around it to keep its own contents separate from the external envir onment. Lar ge and complex cells, including cells from multicellular organisms, need a lot of chemical activities to support their complicated structure and function. To keep these activities of different kinds separate fr om each other , these cells use membrane-bound little structures (or ‘organelles’) within themselves. This is one of the featur es of the eukaryotic cells that distinguish them from prokaryotic cells. Some of these or ganelles are visible only with an electron microscope. We have talked about the nucleus in a previous section. Some important examples of cell organelles which we will discuss now are: endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus, lysosomes, mitochondria and plastids. They are important because they carry out some very crucial functions in cells. 5.2.5 (i) ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM (ER) The endoplasmic r eticulum (ER) is a lar ge network of membrane-bound tubes and sheets. It looks like long tubules or round or oblong bags (vesicles). The ER membrane is similar in structure to the plasma membrane. There are two types of ER– rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER) and smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER). RER looks rough under a microscope because it has particles called ribosomes attached to its sur face. The ribosomes, which ar e pr esent in all active cells, are the sites of protein manufactur e. The manufactured proteins are then sent to various places in the cell depending on need, using the ER. The SER helps in the manufactur e of fat molecules, or lipids, important forcell function. Some of these proteins and lipids help in building the cell membrane. This pr ocess is known as membrane biogenesis. Some other pr oteins and lipids function as enzymes and hormones. Although the ER varies greatly in appearance in different cells, it always forms a network system. Q Fig. 5.5: Animal cell Thus, one function of the ER is to serve as channels for the transport of materials (especially pr oteins) between various regions of the cytoplasm or between the cytoplasm and the nucleus. The ER also functions as a cytoplasmic framework providing a sur face