[Page 1]
While examining a thin slice of cork, Robert Hooke saw that the cork r esembled the structure of a honeycomb consisting of many little compartments. Cork is a substance which comes fr om the bark of a tr ee. This was in the year 1665 when Hooke made this chance observation through a self-designed microscope. Robert Hooke called these boxes cells. Cell is a Latin word for ‘a little room’. This may seem to be a very small and insignificant incident but it is very important in the history of science. This was the very first time that someone had observed that living things appear to consist of separate units. The use of the word ‘cell’ to describe these units is being used till this day in biology. Let us find out about cells. 5.1 What are Living Organisms Made Up of? Activity ______________ 5.1 • Let us take a small piece from an onion bulb. With the help of a pair of forceps, we can peel of f the skin (called epidermis) from the concave side (inner layer) of the onion. This layer can be put immediately in a watch-glass containing water. This will prevent the peel from getting folded or getting dry. What do we do with this peel? • Let us take a glass slide, put a drop of water on it and transfer a small piece of the peel from the watch glass to the slide. Make sur e that the peel is perfectly flat on the slide. A thin camel hair paintbrush might be necessary to help transfer the peel. Now we put a drop of safranin solution on this piece followed by a cover slip. Take care to avoid air bubbles while putting the cover slip with the help of a mounting needle. Ask your teacher for help. W e have prepared a temporary mount of onion peel. We can observe this slide under low power followed by high powers of a compound microscope. Fig. 5.1: Compound microscope What do we observe as we look through the lens? Can we draw the structur es that we are able to see thr ough the micr oscope, on an observation sheet? Does it look like Fig. 5.2? Eyepiece Coarse adjustment Fine adjustment Arm Objective lens Stage Swivel Mirror Base Body tube Clip Microscope slide Condenser Fig. 5.2: Cells of an onion peel 5 T TT TTHE HEHE HEHE F F F F FUNDAMENTALUNDAMENTALUNDAMENTALUNDAMENTALUNDAMENTAL U U U U UNIT NITNIT NITNIT OF OFOF OFOF L L L L LIFE IFEIFE IFEIFE C hapter Nucleus Cells Reprint 2025-26
me C hapter 5 THE FUNDAMENTAL UNIT oF LIFE While examining a thin slice of cork, Robert avoid air bubbles while putting the Hooke saw that the cork resembled the cover slip with the help of a mounting structure of a honeycomb consisting of many needle. Ask your teacher tor help. We little compartments. Cork is a substance onion peed We a emp ory Haan which comes from the bark of a tree. This under low power followed by high was in the year 1665 when Hooke made this powers of a compound microscope. chance observation through a self-designed microscope. Robert Hooke called these boxes LY eyemece cells. Cell is a Latin word for ‘a little room’. it . This may seem to be a very small and L insignificant incident but it is very important ‘| f: ho in the history of science. This was the very first Body tube «| Gi Coarse adjustinent time that someone had observed that living , iI | C2 vine aa . things appear to consist of separate units. The _ i nd he adjustarennt use of the word ‘cell’ to describe these units is cp : Object lens being used tll this day in biology. Microscope elle . gil: ee Let us find out about cells. ee Stage ; — ct G swivel Condenser “Ai 5.1 What are Living Organisms Fe Mime Made Up of? we Be Activity 5, 1 Pig. 5.1: Compound microscope ¢ Let us take a small piece from an onion What do we observe as we look through bulb. With the help ofa pair of forceps, the lens? Can we draw the structures that we can peel off the skin (called cee . . veers epidermis) from the concave side (inner we are able to see through the microscope, laver) of the onion. This layer can be on an observation sheet? Does it look like put immediately in a watch-glass Fig. 5.2? containing water. This will prevent the = rel rom geuing tla or seine dry. nani . 0 What do we do with this peel? ~~ KY ~ ¢ Let us take a glass slide. put a drop of Papeete EL Nucleus water on it and transfer a small piece - > of the peel from the watch glass to the Se Cells slide. Make sure that the peel is °° gnc <> perfectly flat on the slide. A thin camel . x hair paintbrush might he necessary to ae whe help transfer the peel. Now we put a 7 ” drop of safranin solution on this piece followed by a cover slip. Take care to Fig. 5.2: Cells ofan onion peel Reprint 2025-26

[Page 2]
SCIENCE50 Chlamydomonas, Paramoecium and bacteria. These or ganisms ar e called unicellular organisms (uni = single). On the other hand, many cells gr oup together in a single body and assume different functions in it to for m various body parts in multicellular organisms (multi = many) such as some fungi, plants and animals. Can we find out names of some more unicellular organisms? Every multi-cellular or ganism has come from a single cell. How? Cells divide to produce cells of their own kind. All cells thus come from pre-existing cells. Activity ______________ 5.2 • We can try pr eparing temporary mounts of leaf peels, tip of r oots of onion or even peels of onions of different sizes. • After performing the above activity, let us see what the answers to the following questions would be: (a) Do all cells look alike in ter ms of shape and size? (b) Do all cells look alike in structure? (c) Could we find dif ferences among cells from different parts of a plant body? (d) What similarities could we find? Some or ganisms can also have cells of different kinds. Look at the following picture. It depicts some cells from the human body. Sperm Bone cell Smooth muscle cell Blood cells Ovum Fig. 5.3: Various cells from the human body More to know We can try preparing temporary mounts of peels of onions of different sizes. What do we observe? Do we see similar structures or different structures? What are these structures? These structures look similar to each other. Together they for m a big structure like an onion bulb! W e find fr om this activity that onion bulbs of dif ferent sizes have similar small structures visible under a microscope. The cells of the onion peel will all look the same, regardless of the size of the onion they came from. These small structures that we see ar e the basic building units of the onion bulb. These structur es ar e called cells. Not only onions, but all or ganisms that we observe around are made up of cells. However, there are also single cells that live on their own. Cells wer e first discover ed by Robert Hooke in 1665. He observed the cells in a cork slice with the help of a primitive micr oscope. Leeuwenhoek (1674), with the improved microscope, discovered the free living cells in pond water for the first time. It was Robert Br own in 1831 who discovered the nucleus in the cell. Purkinje in 1839 coined the ter m ‘pr otoplasm’ for the fluid substance of the cell. The cell theory, that all the plants and animals are composed of cells and that the cell is the basic unit of life, was pr esented by two biologists, Schleiden (1838) and Schwann (1839). The cell theory was further expanded by V irchow (1855) by suggesting that all cells arise from pre-existing cells. With the discovery of the electron microscope in 1940, it was possible to observe and understand the complex structure of the cell and its various organelles. The invention of magnifying lenses led to the discovery of the micr oscopic world. It is now known that a single cell may constitute a whole or ganism as in Amoeba, Nerve Cell Fat cell Reprint 2025-26
We can try preparing temporary mounts — Chlamydomonas, Paramoeciumand bacteria. of peels of onions of different sizes. What do These organisms are called unicellular we observe? Do we see similar structures or — organisms (uni = single). On the other hand, different structures? many cells group together in a single body What are these structures? and assume different functions in it to form various body parts in multicellular organisms These structures look similar to each other. {multi = many) such as some fungi, plants Together they form a big structure like an and animals. Can we find out names of some onion bulb! We find from this activity that = more unicellular organisms? onion bulbs of different sizes have similar Every multi-cellular organism has come small structures visible under a microscope. from a single cell. How? Cells divide to The cells of the onion peel will all look the — produce cells of their own kind. All cells thus same, regardless of the size of the onion they — come from pre-existing cells. came from. . These small structures that we see are Activity 5.2 the basic building units of the onion bulb. Thece « _ . ° We can try preparing temporary These structures are called cells. Not only , eo : - mounts of leaf peels, tip of roots of onions, but all organisms that we observe onion or even peels of omuons of different around are made up of cells. However, there sizes. are also single cells that live on their own. . After performing the above activity, let us see what the answers to the following Cells were first discovered by questions would be: Robert Hooke in 1665. He observed {a} Do all cells look alike in terms of the cells in a cork slice with the help shape and size? - > of a primitive microscope. th} Do all cells look alike in Structure? . (c) Could we find differences among Leeuwenhoek (1674), with the cells from different parts of a improved microscope. discovered the plant bedy? free living cells in pond water for the {d) What similarities could we find? first time. It was Robert Brown in Some organisms can also have cells of 2 1831 who discovered the nucleus in different kinds Look at the followin S pi t re. ee the cell. Purkinje in 1839 coined the 8. a 8 picture. = term ‘protoplasm’ for the fluid It depicts some cells from the human body. ° substance of the cell. The cell theory, ran hea that all the plants and animals are t . £ composed of cells and that the cell is oY LZ s the basic unit of life, was presented \ @ @ y; by two biologists, Schleiden (1838) . (ed : \ and Schwann (1839). The cell theory \ @ was further expanded by Virchow 4A Blood \ (1855) by suggesting that all cells _ cells Kerve Cell AN arise from pre-existing cells. With the Snooth \ discovery of the electron microscope cell . in 1940, it was possible to observe and Noy COOTER ." understand the complex structure of mee { A the cell and its various organelles. Bone tell 4 Fat cell The invention of magnifying lenses led to . NM A the discovery of the microscopic world. It is ovum aes now known that a single cell may constitute Sper a whole organism as in Amoeba, Fig. 5.3: Various cells from the human body 50 Science. : Reprint 2025-26

[Page 3]
THE FUNDAMENTAL UNIT OF LIFE 51 The shape and size of cells are related to the specific function they perform. Some cells like Amoeba have changing shapes. In some cases the cell shape could be mor e or less fixed and peculiar for a particular type of cell; for example, nerve cells have a typical shape. Each living cell has the capacity to perform certain basic functions that ar e characteristic of all living for ms. How does a living cell per form these basic functions? We know that there is a division of labour in multicellular or ganisms such as human beings. This means that dif ferent parts of the human body perform different functions. The human body has a heart to pump blood, a stomach to digest food and so on. Similarly, division of labour is also seen within a single cell. In fact, each such cell has got certain specific components within it known as cell organelles. Each kind of cell or ganelle performs a special function, such as making new material in the cell, clearing up the waste material fr om the cell and so on. A cell is able to live and per for m all its functions because of these organelles. These organelles together constitute the basic unit called the cell. It is inter esting that all cells are found to have the same or ganelles, no matter what their function is or what organism they are found in. uestions 1. Who discovered cells, and how? 2. Why is the cell called the structural and functional unit of life? 5.2 What is a Cell Made Up of? What is the Structural Organisation of a Cell? We saw above that the cell has special components called organelles. How is a cell organised? If we study a cell under a microscope, we would come across three features in almost every cell; plasma membrane, nucleus and cytoplasm. All activities inside the cell and interactions of the cell with its envir onment are possible due to these features. Let us see how. 5.2.1 PLASMA MEMBRANE OR CELL MEMBRANE This is the outermost covering of the cell that separates the contents of the cell fr om its external environment. The plasma membrane allows or permits the entry and exit of some materials in and out of the cell. It also prevents movement of some other materials. The cell membrane, ther efore, is called a selectively permeable membrane. How does the movement of substances take place into the cell? How do substances move out of the cell? Some substances like carbon dioxide or oxygen can move acr oss the cell membrane by a process called diffusion. We have studied the process of dif fusion in earlier chapters. We saw that there is spontaneous movement of a substance fr om a r egion of high concentration to a r egion wher e its concentration is low. Something similar to this happens in cells when, for example, some substance like CO2 (which is cellular waste and r equires to be excreted out by the cell) accumulates in high concentrations inside the cell. In the cell’s external environment, the concentration of CO2 is low as compar ed to that inside the cell. As soon as ther e is a dif ference of concentration of CO2 inside and outside a cell, CO2 moves out of the cell, fr om a r egion of high concentration, to a r egion of low concentration outside the cell by the process of diffusion. Similarly, O 2 enters the cell by the pr ocess of dif fusion when the level or concentration of O2 inside the cell decreases. Thus, dif fusion plays an important r ole in gaseous exchange between the cells as well as the cell and its external environment. Water also obeys the law of diffusion. The movement of water molecules through such a selectively permeable membrane is called osmosis. Q Reprint 2025-26
The shape and size of cells are related to every cell: plasma membrane, nucleus and the specific function they perform. Some cells cytoplasm. All activities inside the cell and like Amoeba have changing shapes. In some interactions of the cell with its environment cases the cell shape could be more or less — are possible due to these features. Let us see fixed and peculiar fora particular type of cell: how. for example, nerve cells have a typical shape. Each living cell has the capacity to 5.2.1 PLASMA MEMBRANE OR CELL perform certain basic functions that are MEMBRANE characteristic of all living forms. How does ~~ “— a living cell perform these basic functions? This is the outermost covering of the cell that We know that there is a division of labour in separates the contents of the cell from its multicellular organisms such as human — external environment. The plasma membrane beings. This means that different parts of allows or permits the entry and exit of some the human hody perform different functions. — materials in and out of the cell. It also The human body has a heart to pump blood. prevents movement of some other materials. a stomach to digest food and so on. Similarly. The cell membrane, therefore, is called a division of labour is also seen within a single selectively permeable membrane. cell, In fact, each such cell has got certain How does the movement of substances specific components within it known as cell take place into the cell’? How do substances organelles. Each kind of cell organelle move out of the cell’? performs a special function, such as making Some substances like carbon dioxide or new material in the cell, clearing up the oxygen can move across the cell membrane waste material from the cell and so on. A bya process called diffusion. We have studied cell is able to live and perform all its the process of diffusion in earlier chapters. functions because of these organelles. These We saw that there is spontaneous movement organelles together constitute the basic unit of a substance from a region of high called the cell. It is interesting that all cells goneentration to a region where its are found to have the same organelles. nO gencentration is low. matter what their function is or what Something similar to this happens in cells organism they are found in. when. for example, some substance like CO, . {which is cellular waste and requires to be (1 westions excreted out by the cell) accumulates in high | 1. Who discovercd cells. and how? concentrations inside the cell. In the cell's 2 Why is the cell called the external environment, the concentration of saructuraland functional unit ot CO, Is low as compared to that inside the | life? cell. As soon as there is a difference of G concentration of CO, inside and outside a cell, i, CO, moves out of the cell. from a region of high concentration, to a region of low 5.2 What is a Cell Made Up of? concentration outside the cell by the process . of diffusion. Similarly, O, enters the cell by What is the Structural the process of diffusion when the level or Organisation of a Cell? concentration of o, inside the cell decreases, us, diffusion plays an important role in We saw above that the cell has special gaseous exchange between the cells as well components called organelles. How is a cell as the cell and its external environment. organised? Water also obeys the law of diffusion. The “Ifwe study a cell under a microscope. we movement of water molecules through such a would come across three features in almost selectively permeable membrane is called osmosis. Th, Puspasenta Use or Lire 51 Reprint 2025-26 :

[Page 4]
SCIENCE52 52525252 The movement of water across the plasma membrane is also affected by the amount of substance dissolved in water. Thus, osmosis is the net diffusion of water across a selectively permeable membrane toward a higher solute concentration. What will happen if we put an animal cell or a plant cell into a solution of sugar or salt in water? One of the following thr ee things could happen: 1. If the medium surrounding the cell has a higher water concentration than the cell, meaning that the outside solution is very dilute, the cell will gain water by osmosis. Such a solution is known as a hypotonic solution. Water molecules are free to pass across the cell membrane in both directions, but more water will come into the cell than will leave. The net (overall) result is that water enters the cell. The cell is likely to swell up. 2. If the medium has exactly the same water concentration as the cell, there will be no net movement of water across the cell membrane. Such a solution is known as an isotonic solution. Water crosses the cell membrane in both directions, but the amount going in is the same as the amount going out, so there is no overall movement of water. The cell will stay the same size. 3. If the medium has a lower concentration of water than the cell, meaning that it is a very concentrated solution, the cell will lose water by osmosis. Such a solution is known as a hypertonic solution. Again, water cr osses the cell membrane in both directions, but this time more water leaves the cell than enters it. Therefore the cell will shrink. Thus, osmosis is a special case of diffusion through a selectively permeable membrane. Now let us try out the following activity: Activity ______________ 5.3 (a) Remove the shell of an egg by dissolving it in dilute hydrochloric acid. The shell is mostly calcium carbonate. A thin outer skin now encloses the egg. Put the egg in pure water and observe after 5 minutes. What do we observe? The egg swells because water passes into it by osmosis. (b) Place a similar de-shelled egg in a concentrated salt solution and observe for 5 minutes. The egg shrinks. Why? Water passes out of the egg solution into the salt solution because the salt solution is more concentrated. We can also try a similar activity with dried raisins or apricots. Activity ______________ 5.4 • Put dried raisins or apricots in plain water and leave them for some time. Then place them into a concentrated solution of sugar or salt. Y ou will observe the following: (a) Each gains water and swells when placed in water . (b) However , when placed in the concentrated solution it loses water, and consequently shrinks. Unicellular freshwater organisms and most plant cells tend to gain water thr ough osmosis. Absorption of water by plant r oots is also an example of osmosis. Thus, diffusion is important in exhange of gases and water in the life of a cell. In additions to this, the cell also obtains nutrition fr om its envir onment. Dif ferent molecules move in and out of the cell through a type of transport r equiring use of energy. The plasma membrane is flexible and is made up of or ganic molecules called lipids and proteins. However, we can observe the structur e of the plasma membrane only through an electr on microscope. The flexibility of the cell membrane also enables the cell to engulf in food and other material from its external environment. Such processes are known as endocytosis. Amoeba acquires its food through such processes. Reprint 2025-26
The movement of water across the plasma Activity 5.3 membrane is also affected by the TTT amount of substance dissolved in water. Thus, {a} Remove the shell of an egg by osmosis is the net diffusion of water across a dissolving it in dilute hydrochloric selectively permeable membrane toward a acid. The shell is mostly caleium earbonate. A thin outer skin now higher solute concentration, encloses the egg, Put the egg in pure What will happen if we put an animal cell water and observe after 5 minutes. or a plant cell into a solution of sugar or salt What do we observe? in water? The epg swells because water passes One of the following three things could into it by osmosis. happen: (bh) Place a similar de-shelled egg in a concentrated salt solution and ohserve 1. Ifthe medium surrounding the cell has = oe on - ne - - for 5 minutes. The egg shrinks. Why? a higher water concentration than the Water passes out of the egg solution cell, meaning that the outside solution into the salt solution because the salt is very dilute. the cell will gain water by solution 1s more concentrated. osmosis. Such a solution is known as We can also try a similar activity with dried a hypotonic solution. raisins or apricots. Water molecules are free to pass Activity 5.4 across the cell membrane in both TT directions, but more water will come ¢ Put dned raisins or apricots in plain into the cell than will leave. The net water and leave them for some time. Then place them into a concentrated (overall) result is that water enters the solution of sugar or salt. You will cell. The cell is likely to swell up. observe the following: 2. If the medium has exactly the same (a) Each gains water and swells water concentration as the cell. there when placed in water, - (b) However, when placed in the will be no net movement of water across concentrated solution it loses the cell membrane. Such a solution is water, and consequently shrinks. known as an isotonic solution, Unicellular freshwater organisms and Water crosses the cell membrane in most plant cells tend to gain water through both directions, but the amount going — osmosis. Absorption of water by plant roots in is the same as the amount going out, —_ 1 also an example of osmosis. so there is no overall movement of Thus, diffusion is important in exhange water. The cell will stay the same size. of gases and water in the life of a cell. In ‘ , additions to this, the cell also obtains 3. If the medium has a lower nutrition from its environment. Different concentration of water than the cell, molecules move in and out of the cell meaning that it is a very concentrated — through a type of transport requiring use solution, the cell will lose water by — of energy. osmosis. Such a solution is known as The plasma membrane is flexible and is a hypertonic solution. made up of organic molecules called lipids Again. water crosses the cell and proteins. However, we can observe the Bain. . structure of the plasma membrane only membrane in both directions, but this . - through an electron microscope. lime more water leaves the cell than The flexibility of the cell membrane also enters it, Therefore the cell will shrink. enables the cell to engulf in food and other Thus, osmosis is a special case of diffusion material from its external environment. Such through a selectively permeable membrane. processes are known as endocytosis. Amoeba Now let us try out the following activity: acquires its food through such processes. 52 Sewer : Reprint 2025-26

[Page 5]
THE FUNDAMENTAL UNIT OF LIFE 53 Activity ______________ 5.5 • Find out about electron microscopes from resources in the school library or through the inter net. Discuss it with your teacher. uestions 1. How do substances like CO2 and water move in and out of the cell? Discuss. 2. Why is the plasma membrane called a selectively per meable membrane? 5.2.2 CELL WALL Plant cells, in addition to the plasma membrane, have another rigid outer covering called the cell wall. The cell wall lies outside the plasma membrane. The plant cell wall is mainly composed of cellulose. Cellulose is a complex substance and provides structural strength to plants. When a living plant cell loses water thr ough osmosis ther e is shrinkage or contraction of the contents of the cell away from the cell wall. This phenomenon is known as plasmolysis. W e can observe this phenomenon by per forming the following activity: Activity ______________ 5.6 • Mount the peel of a Rhoeo leaf in water on a slide and examine cells under the high power of a microscope. Note the small green granules, called chlor oplasts. They contain a gr een substance called chlor ophyll. Put a strong solution of sugar or salt on the mounted leaf on the slide. W ait for a minute and observe under a microscope. What do we see? • Now place some Rhoeo leaves in boiling water for a few minutes. This kills the cells. Then mount one leaf on a slide and observe it under a microscope. Put a strong solution of sugar or salt on the mounted leaf on the slide. Wait for a minute and observe it again. What do we find? Did plasmolysis occur now? What do we infer from this activity? It appears that only living cells, and not dead cells, are able to absorb water by osmosis. Cell walls permit the cells of plants, fungi and bacteria to withstand very dilute (hypotonic) external media without bursting. In such media the cells tend to take up water by osmosis. The cell swells, building up pressure against the cell wall. The wall exerts an equal pr essure against the swollen cell. Because of their walls, such cells can withstand much gr eater changes in the surrounding medium than animal cells. 5.2.3 NUCLEUS Remember the temporary mount of onion peel we prepared? We had put iodine solution on the peel. Why? What would we see if we tried observing the peel without putting the iodine solution? Try it and see what the dif ference is. Further, when we put iodine solution on the peel, did each cell get evenly coloured? According to their chemical composition dif fer ent r egions of cells get colour ed differentially. Some r egions appear darker than other regions. Apart from iodine solution we could also use safranin solution or methylene blue solution to stain the cells. We have observed cells from an onion; let us now observe cells from our own body. Activity ______________ 5.7 • Let us take a glass slide with a drop of water on it. Using an ice-cream spoon gently scrape the inside surface of the cheek. Does any material get stuck on the spoon? W ith the help of a needle we can transfer this material and spread it evenly on the glass slide kept ready for this. T o colour the material we can put a dr op of methylene blue solution on it. Now the material is ready for observation under microscope. Do not forget to put a cover-slip on it! • What do we observe? What is the shape of the cells we see? Draw it on the observation sheet. Q Reprint 2025-26
Activity 5.5 What do we infer from this activity? It appears that only living cells. and not dead ¢ Find out about cern thence on cells, are able to absorb water by osmosis. from re Sources in (he school library or Cell walls permit the cells of plants, fungi through the internet. Discuss it with your teacher. and bacteria to withstand very dilute . (hypotonic) external media without bursting. he . s . ry a e cells yt rs vater A) ueshions In such me dia the cells tend to take up water | by osmosis. The cell swells, building up | 1.) How do substances like CO and pressure against the cell wall. The wall exerts Water move in and out of the ecll? an equal pressure against the swollen cell. > es he pl ; Because of their walls. such cells can \U 2. wy is the plasma nicmbranc withstand much greater changes in the called a selectively permeable . ° ee surrounding medium than animal cells. menibranc, 5.2.3, NUCLEUS 5.2.2 CELL WALL : Remember the temporary mount of onion peel Plant cells, in addition to the plasma we prepared’? We had put iodine solution on membrane. have another nee ore coven the peel. Why? What would we see if we tried called the cell wail. The we wall les outside observing the peel without putting the iodine the plasma membrane. The plant cell wall is op oer . , solution? Try it and see what the difference mainly composed of cellulose. Cellulose is a . ° ae ae . is. Further, when we put iodine solution on complex substance and provides structural tt | did h cell get \ 1 1? e pee ach ¢ et evenly ¢ re strength to plants. he peel, did each cell get evenly coloured? When a living plant cell loses water According to their chemical composition through osmosis there is shrinkage or different regions of cells get coloured contraction of the contents of the cell away differentially. Some regions appear darker from the cell wall. This phenomenon is known __ than other regions. Apart from iodine solution as plasmolysis. We can observe this we could also use safranin solution or phenomenon by performing the following — methylene blue solution to stain the cells. activity: We have observed cells from an onion: let ary us now observe cells from our own body. Activity 5.6 , . Mount the peel of a Rhoco leaf in water Activity 5.7 on a slide and examine cells under the high power of a microscope. Note . Let us take a glass slide with a drop of the small green granules, called water on it. Using an ice-cream spoon chloroplasts. They contain a green gently scrape the inside surface of the substance called chlorophyll, Put a cheek. Does any material get stuck on strong solution of sugar or salt on the the spoon? With the help of a needle mounted leaf on the slide. Wait for a we can transfer this material and minute and observe under a spread it evenly on the glass slide kept MICTOSCOPE. What do we seed . ready for this. To colour the material . Now place some Rhoeo leaves in boiling - . . , . Mate le; we can put a drop of methylene blue water for a few minutes. This kills the . . a cells. ‘Then mount one leaf on a slide solution on it. Now the material is ready and observe it under a microscope. Put for observation under microscope. Do a strong solution of sugar or salt on not forget to put a cover-slip on it the mounted leaf on the shde. Wait for * What do we observe? What is the a minute and observe it again. What shape of the cells we see? Draw it on do we find? Did plasmolysis occur now? the observation sheet. Th, Puspasenta Use or Lire 53. Reprint 2025-26

[Page 6]
SCIENCE54 • Was there a darkly coloured, spherical or oval, dot-like structure near the centre of each cell? This structure is called nucleus. W ere ther e similar structures in onion peel cells? The nucleus has a double layered covering called nuclear membrane. The nuclear membrane has pores which allow the transfer of material fr om inside the nucleus to its outside, that is, to the cytoplasm (which we will talk about in section 5.2.4). The nucleus contains chr omosomes, which are visible as r od-shaped structur es only when the cell is about to divide. Chr omosomes contain infor mation for inheritance of characters from parents to next generation in the for m of DNA (Deoxyribo Nucleic Acid) molecules. Chr omosomes are composed of DNA and protein. DNA molecules contain the infor mation necessary for constructing and organising cells. Functional segments of DNA are called genes. In a cell which is not dividing, this DNA is present as part of chr omatin material. Chromatin material is visible as entangled mass of thread like structures. Whenever the cell is about to divide, the chromatin material gets organised into chromosomes. The nucleus plays a central role in cellular reproduction, the process by which a single cell divides and for ms two new cells. It also plays a crucial part, along with the environment, in determining the way the cell will develop and what for m it will exhibit at maturity, by directing the chemical activities of the cell. In some or ganisms like bacteria, the nuclear r egion of the cell may be poorly defined due to the absence of a nuclear membrane. Such an undefined nuclear region containing only nucleic acids is called a nucleoid. Such organisms, whose cells lack a nuclear membrane, are called prokaryotes (Pro = primitive or primary; karyote ≈ karyon = nucleus). Or ganisms with cells having a nuclear membrane are called eukaryotes. Prokaryotic cells (see Fig. 5.4) also lack most of the other cytoplasmic organelles present in eukaryotic cells. Many of the functions of such organelles are also performed by poorly or ganised parts of the cytoplasm (see section 5.2.4). The chlorophyll in photosynthetic pr okaryotic bacteria is associated with membranous vesicles (bag like structures) but not with plastids as in eukaryotic cells (see section 5.2.5). RibosomesPlasma membrane Cell wall Nucleoid Fig. 5.4: Prokaryotic cell 5.2.4 CYTOPLASM When we look at the temporary mounts of onion peel as well as human cheek cells, we can see a lar ge region of each cell enclosed by the cell membrane. This r egion takes up very little stain. It is called the cytoplasm. The cytoplasm is the fluid content inside the plasma membrane. It also contains many specialised cell or ganelles. Each of these organelles performs a specific function for the cell. Cell or ganelles ar e enclosed by membranes. In pr okaryotes, beside the absence of a defined nuclear r egion, the membrane-bound cell or ganelles ar e also absent. On the other hand, the eukaryotic cells have nuclear membrane as well as membrane-enclosed or ganelles. The significance of membranes can be illustrated with the example of viruses. Viruses lack any membranes and hence do not show characteristics of life until they enter a living body and use its cell machinery to multiply. Reprint 2025-26
e = Was there a darkly coloured, spherical present in eukaryotic cells. Many of the or oval, dot-like structure near the functions of such organelles are also centre of each cell? This structure is performed by poorly organised parts of the called nucleus. Were there similar cytoplasm (see section 5.2.4). The chlorophyll structures in onion peel cells? in photosynthetic prokaryotic bacteria is The nucleus has a double layered covering — associated with membranous vesicles (bag called nuclear membrane. The nuclear — like structures) but not with plastids as in membrane has pores which allow the transfer eukaryotic cells (see section 5.2.5). of material from inside the nucleus to its outside, that is, to the cytoplasm (which we will talk about in section 5.2.4). Plasma Ribosomes The nucleus contains chromosomes, tnembrane \ te, which are visible as rod-shaped structures \ Oo > only when the cell is about to divide. Cell wall 8 7 ee : r Chromosomes contain information for NYO . nary inheritance of characters from parents to next on Se Nuclead generation in the form of DNA (Deoxyribo a2* ye Nucleic Acid) molecules. Chromosomes are ~ composed of DNA and protein. DNA molecules contain the information necessary for constructing and organising cells. Functional Fig. 5.4: Prokaryotic cell segments of DNA are called genes. In a cell which is not dividing, this DNA is present as a . part of chromatin material. Chromatin 5.2.4 CYTOPLASM material is visible as entangled mass of thread like structures. Whenever the cell is about to When we look at the temporary mounts of divide. the chromatin material gets organised OM#ON peel as well as human cheek cells, we into chromosomes. , j can see a large region of each cell enclosed The nucleus plays a central role in cellular — by the cell membrane. This region takes up reproduction, the process by which a single Very little stain. It is called the cytoplasm. cell divides and forms two new cells. It also The cytoplasm is the fluid content inside the plays a crucial part, along with the plasma membrane. It also contains many environment, in determining the way the cell specialised cell organelles. Each of these will develop and what form it will exhibit at. OT8anelles performs a specific function for the maturity, by directing the chemical activities cell. of the cell. Cell organelles are enclosed by In some organisms like bacteria, the © Membranes. In prokaryotes, beside the nuclear region of the cell may be poorly absence of a defined nuclear region, the defined due to the absence of a nuclear Membrane-bound cell organelles are also membrane. Such an undefined nuclear region — absent. On the other hand. the eukaryotic containing only nucleic acids is called a cells have nuclear membrane as well as nucleoid. Such organisms, whose cells lack — membrane-enclosed organelles. a nuclear membrane, are called prokaryotes The significance of membranes can be (Pro = primitive or primary; karyote = karyon illustrated with the example of viruses. = nucleus). Organisms with cells having a Viruses lack any membranes and hence do nuclear membrane are called eukaryotes. not show characteristics of life until they enter Prokaryotic cells (see Fig. 5.4) also lack — a living body and use its cell machinery to most of the other cytoplasmic organelles — multiply. 54 Science. : Reprint 2025-26

[Page 7]
THE FUNDAMENTAL UNIT OF LIFE 55 uestion 1. Fill in the gaps in the following table illustrating dif ferences between pr okaryotic and eukaryotic cells. Prokaryotic Cell Eukaryotic Cell 1. Size : generally 1. Size: generally small ( 1-10 µ m) large ( 5-100 µ m) 1 µ m = 10–6 m 2. Nuclear region: 2. Nuclear region: _______________ well defined and _______________ surrounded by a and known as__ nuclear membrane 3. Chromosome: 3. More than one single chromosome 4. Membrane-bound 4. _______________ cell organelles _______________ absent _______________ 5.2.5 CELL ORGANELLES Every cell has a membrane around it to keep its own contents separate from the external envir onment. Lar ge and complex cells, including cells from multicellular organisms, need a lot of chemical activities to support their complicated structure and function. To keep these activities of dif ferent kinds separate fr om each other , these cells use membrane-bound little structures (or ‘organelles’) within themselves. This is one of the featur es of the eukaryotic cells that distinguish them from prokaryotic cells. Some of these or ganelles are visible only with an electron microscope. We have talked about the nucleus in a previous section. Some important examples of cell organelles which we will discuss now are: endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus, lysosomes, mitochondria and plastids. They are important because they carry out some very crucial functions in cells. 5.2.5 (i) ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM (ER) The endoplasmic r eticulum (ER) is a lar ge network of membrane-bound tubes and sheets. It looks like long tubules or round or oblong bags (vesicles). The ER membrane is similar in structure to the plasma membrane. There are two types of ER– rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER) and smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER). RER looks rough under a microscope because it has particles called ribosomes attached to its sur face. The ribosomes, which ar e pr esent in all active cells, are the sites of protein manufactur e. The manufactured proteins are then sent to various places in the cell depending on need, using the ER. The SER helps in the manufactur e of fat molecules, or lipids, important for cell function. Some of these proteins and lipids help in building the cell membrane. This pr ocess is known as membrane biogenesis. Some other pr oteins and lipids function as enzymes and hormones. Although the ER varies greatly in appearance in different cells, it always forms a network system. Q Fig. 5.5: Animal cell Thus, one function of the ER is to serve as channels for the transport of materials (especially pr oteins) between various regions of the cytoplasm or between the cytoplasm and the nucleus. The ER also functions as a cytoplasmic framework providing a sur face Reprint 2025-26
ay uestion 5.2.5 (i) ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM (ER) 1. Fill in he gaps in the tollowing The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is a large | table fMustrating differcuces network of membrane-bound tubes and | berween prokarvotic (and sheets. It looks like long tubules or round or a cukarvotic cclls. oblong hags (vesicles). The ER membrane is similar in structure to the plasma membrane. There are two types of ER- rough endoplasmic Seale. a Dales - reticulum (RER) and smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER). RER looks rough under a 1. Size : generally 1. Size: generally microscope because it has particles called small (1-10 um) large (5-100 pm) ribosomes attached to its surface. The lum = 10%m ribosomes, which are present in all active cells, are the sites of protein manufacture. 2. Nuclear region: — 2. Nuclear region: The manufactured proteins are then sent to well defined and various places in the cell depending on need, surrounded by a using the ER. The SER helps in the and known as_ nuclear membrane manufacture of fat molecules, or lipids, important for cell function. Some of these 3. Chromosome: 3. More than one proteins and lipids help in building the cell single chromosome membrane. This process is known as , membrane biogenesis. Some other proteins 4. Membrane-bound 4. and lipids function as enzymes and cell organelles hormones. Although the ER varies greatly in absent appearance in different cells, it always forms a network system. 5.2.5 CELI. ORGANELLES Golgi . appargtiiy, ihn , _ Every cell has a membrane around it to keep ea Ud rie Pas its own contents separate from the external i e : Nr 7 : - / e @e Centrale environment. Large and complex cells. Smooth — f \oy | e “ including cells from multicellular organisms. endoplasmic. g ff Ag se need a lot of chemical activities to support i Re ofa ‘% _-Lysosome their complicated structure and function. To Secleat- rj Pas NO keep these activities of different kinds ——- i G iB PY eB Ribosomes separate from each other, these cells use Hl Ht xs uM ~Mitochond:on membrane-bound little structures (or K® EP a a ‘organelles’) within themselves. This is one of See fy the features of the eukaryotic cells that Sucldas fi j reticulum distinguish them from prokaryotic cells. Some Se cee Cytoplisin of these organelles are visible only with an electron microscope. Fig. 5.5: Animal cell We have talked about the nucleus in a previous section. Some important examples Thus, one function of the ER is to serve as of cell organelles which we will discuss now Channels for the transport of materials are: endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus, — {especially proteins) between various regions lysosomes, mitochondria and plastids. They of the cytoplasm or between the cytoplasm are important because they carry out some — and the nucleus. The ER also functions as a very crucial functions in cells. cytoplasmic framework providing a surface Th, Puspasenta Use or Lire 55 Reprint 2025-26 :

[Page 8]
SCIENCE56 Camillo Golgi was born at Corteno near Brescia in 1843. He studied medicine at the University of Pavia. After graduating in 1865, he continued to work in Pavia at the Hospital of St. Matteo. At that time most of his investigations were concerned with the nervous system, In 1872 he accepted the post of Chief Medical Officer at the Hospital for the Chronically Sick at Abbiategrasso. He first started his investigations into the nervous system in a little kitchen of this hospital, which he had converted into a laboratory. However , the work of greatest importance, which Golgi carried out was a revolutionary method of staining individual nerve and cell structures. This method is referred to as the ‘black reaction’. This method uses a weak solution of silver nitrate and is particularly valuable in tracing the processes and most delicate ramifications of cells. All through his life, he continued to work on these lines, modifying and improving this technique. Golgi received the highest honours and awards in recognition of his work. He shared the Nobel prize in 1906 with Santiago Ramony Cajal for their work on the structure of the nervous system. 5.2.5 (iii) LYSOSOMES Structurally, lysosomes are membrane-bound sacs filled with digestive enzymes. These enzymes are made by RER. Lysosomes ar e a kind of waste disposal system of the cell. These help to keep the cell clean by digesting any foreign material as well as worn-out cell organelles. Foreign materials entering the cell, such as bacteria or food, as well as old organelles end up in the lysosomes, which break complex substances into simpler substances. L ysosomes are able to do this because they contain powerful digestive enzymes capable of breaking down all organic material. During the disturbance in cellular metabolism, for example, when the cell gets Fig. 5.6: Plant cell for some of the biochemical activities of the cell. In the liver cells of the group of animals called vertebrates (see Chapter 7), SER plays a crucial role in detoxifying many poisons and drugs. 5.2.5 (ii) GOLGI APPARATUS The Golgi apparatus, first described by Camillo Golgi, consists of a system of membrane-bound vesicles (flattened sacs) arranged approximately parallel to each other in stacks called cisterns. These membranes often have connections with the membranes of ER and therefore constitute another portion of a complex cellular membrane system. The material synthesised near the ER is packaged and dispatched to various tar gets inside and outside the cell through the Golgi apparatus. Its functions include the storage, modification and packaging of pr oducts in vesicles. In some cases, complex sugars may be made from simple sugars in the Golgi apparatus. The Golgi apparatus is also involved in the formation of lysosomes [see 5.2.5 (iii)]. Reprint 2025-26
for some of the biochemical activities of the Camillo Golgi was born at cell. In the liver cells of the group of animals Corteno heer Brescia in called vertebrates (see Chapter 7), SER plays 1843 lle studied a crucial role in detoxifying many poisons - , . . a medicine at the University and drugs. of Pavia. After graduating 4 in 1865, he continued to at Rough endoplasmic work in Pavia at the . reticulum Hospital of St. Matteo. At Lysonome ! that time most of his Smooth H va investigations were endoplasmic EY? cmoroptast concerned with the nervous system, In 1872 ~e Pe he accepted the post of Chief Medical Officer EE ) Nucleus at the Hospital for the Chronically Sick at “2 fi be Abbiategrasso. He first started his ( S KA y Golsi ; investigations into the nervous system in a Px WY aa a little kitchen of this hospital, which he had | mn Yl <d i] envelope converted into a laboratory. However. the \ ( \ i Plasma ; work of greatest importance, which Golgt \ ° membrane . Os ee) carried out was a revolutionary method of SS Sy Adjacent staining individual nerve and cell structures. os we \ coh wa wall This method is referred to as the ‘black PS Mitochundrian reaction’. This method uses a weak solution £ \\ Ribosomes of silver nitrate and is particularly valuable Cxtopiasm / in tracing the processes and most delicate Chloroplast ramifications of cells. All through his life, he continued to work on these lines, modifying and improving this technique. Pig. 5.6: Plant cell Golgi received the highest honours and awards in recognition of his work. He shared oe the Nobel prize in 1906 with Santiago 5.2.5 (ii) GOLGI APPARATUS Ramony Cajal for their work on the structure The Golgi apparatus, first described by ofthe nervous system. Camillo Golgi. consists of a system of membrane-bound vesicles (flattened sacs) 5.2.5 (iii) LYSOSOMES arranged approximately parallel to each other in stacks called cisterns. These membranes Structurally. lysosomes are membrane-bound often have connections with the membranes —$ac¢s filled with digestive enzymes. These of ER and therefore constitute another portion — zymes are made by RER. Lysosomes are a ofa complex cellular membrane system. kind of waste disposal system of the cell. These The material synthesised near the ER is help to keep the cell clean by digesting any packaged and dispatched to various targets tore material as well lee eo vsthe cl inside and outside the cell through the Golgi organelles. Foreign materials entering the cell, " such as bacteria or food, as well as old apparatus. Its functions include the storage, organelles end up in the lysosomes. which modification and packaging of products in peek complex substances ‘into simpler vesicles. In some cases, complex sugars May syhstances. Lysosomes are able to do this be made from simple sugars in the Golgi beeause they contain powerful digestive apparatus. The Golgi apparatus is also enzymes capable of breaking down all organic involved in the formation of lysosomes [see material. During the disturbance in cellular 5.2.5 (iii)]. metabolism, for example. when the cell gets 56 Science. : Reprint 2025-26

[Page 9]
THE FUNDAMENTAL UNIT OF LIFE 57 57575757 damaged, lysosomes may burst and the enzymes digest their own cell. Therefore, lysosomes are also known as the ‘suicide bags’ of a cell. 5.2.5 (iv) MITOCHONDRIA Mitochondria are known as the powerhouses of the cell. Mitochondria have two membrane coverings. The outer membrane is porous while the inner membrane is deeply folded. These folds increase surface area for ATP- generating chemical reactions. The energy required for various chemical activities needed for life is released by mitochondria in the form of ATP (Adenosine triphosphate) molecules. ATP is known as the energy currency of the cell. The body uses energy stored in ATP for making new chemical compounds and for mechanical work. Mitochondria are strange organelles in the sense that they have their own DNA and ribosomes. Therefore, mitochondria are able to make some of their own proteins. 5.2.5 (V) PLASTIDS Plastids are present only in plant cells. There are two types of plastids – chromoplasts (coloured plastids) and leucoplasts (white or colourless plastids). Chromoplasts containing the pigment chlorophyll are known as chloroplasts. Chloroplasts are important for photosynthesis in plants. Chloroplasts also contain various yellow or orange pigments in addition to chlorophyll. Leucoplasts are primarily organelles in which materials such as starch, oils and protein granules are stored. The internal organisation of the Chloroplast consists of numerous membrane layers embedded in a material called the stroma. These are similar to mitochondria in external structure. Like the mitochondria, plastids also have their own DNA and ribosomes. 5.2.5 (vi) VACUOLES Vacuoles are storage sacs for solid or liquid contents. Vacuoles are small sized in animal cells while plant cells have very large vacuoles. The central vacuole of some plant cells may occupy 50-90% of the cell volume. In plant cells vacuoles are full of cell sap and provide turgidity and rigidity to the cell. Many substances of importance in the life of the plant cell are stored in vacuoles. These include amino acids, sugars, various organic acids and some proteins. In single-celled organisms like Amoeba, the food vacuole contains the food items that the Amoeba has consumed. In some unicellular organisms, specialised vacuoles also play important roles in expelling excess water and some wastes from the cell. uestions 1. Can you name the two organelles we have studied that contain their own genetic material? 2. If the organisation of a cell is destroyed due to some physical or chemical influence, what will happen? 3. Why are lysosomes known as suicide bags? 4. Where are proteins synthesised inside the cell? Each cell thus acquires its structure and ability to function because of the organisation of its membrane and organelles in specific ways. The cell thus has a basic structural organisation. This helps the cells to perform functions like respiration, obtaining nutrition, and clearing of waste material, or forming new proteins. Thus, the cell is the fundamental structural unit of living organisms. It is also the basic functional unit of life. Cell DivisionCell DivisionCell DivisionCell DivisionCell Division New cells are formed in organisms in order to grow, to replace old, dead and injured cells, and to form gametes required for reproduction. The process by which new cells are made is called cell division. There are two main types of cell division: mitosis and meiosis. The process of cell division by which most of the cells divide for growth is called mitosis. In this process, each cell called mother cell Q Reprint 2025-26
damaged, lysosomes may burst and the In plant cells vacuoles are full of cell sap enzyines digest their own cell. Therefore, and provide turgidity and rigidity to the cell. lysosomes are also known as the ‘suicide bags’ — Many substances of importance in the life of ofa cell. the plant cell are stored in vacuoles. These include amino acids, sugars, various organic 5.2.5 (iv) MItOoCHONDRIA acids and some proteins. In single-celled Mitochondria are known as the powerhouses organisms like Amoeba. the food vacuole of the cell. Mitochondria have two membrane contains the feod items that the Amoeba has coverings. The outer membrane is porous consumed, In some unicellular organisms, . aan ; . 1 , specialised vacuoles also play important roles while the inner membrane is deeply folded. in expelli surotpuecce canatpue Bet es 4 " in expelling excess water and some wastes These folds increase surface area for ATP- ft veel _— rom the cell, generating chemical reactions. The energy required for various chernical activities needed . for life is released by mitochondria in the form (" westious of ATP (Adenosine triphosphate) molecules. [| | | hee ame the two oreanelles ATP is known as the energy currency of the f. Can you name the two organelles cell. The body uses energy stored in ATP for we have studied that contain making new chemical compounds and for their own genetic material? mechanical work. | | 2. if the organisation of a cell is Mitochondria are strange organelles in the oO destroved due lo some physical sense that they have their own DNA and or chentical influence, What will ribosomes. Therefore, mitochondria are able happen? to make some of their own proteins. 3. Why are Ivsosomes Known as spapye suicide bags? 5.2.5 (v) PLastips 4, Where are proteins svnthesised Plastids are present only in plant cells. There inside the cell? are two types of plastids - chromoplasts (coloured plastids) and leucoplasts (white or Each cell thus acquires its structure and colourless plastids). Chromoplasts containing ability to function because of the organisation the pigment chlorophyll are known as of its membrane and organelles in specific chloroplasts. Chloroplasts are important fer Ways. The cell thus has a basic structural photosynthesis in plants. Chloroplasts also oTanisation. This helps the cells to perform contain various yellow or orange pigments in functions like respiration, obtaining nutrition, addition to chlorophyll. Lencoplasts are @0d clearing of waste material. or forming primarily organelles in which materials such = ew proteins. as starch, oils and protein grannies are stored. Thus, the cellis the fundamental structural ‘The internal organisation of the Chloroplast. Unit of living organisms. It is also the basic consists of numerous membrane layers — functional unit of life. embedded in a material called the stroma. These Cell: Division are similar to mitochondria in external | | structure. Like the mitochondria, plastids also New cells are fortned in organisms in order to have their own DNA and ribosomes. grow, to replace old, dead and injured cells, and to form gametes required for 5.2.5 (vi) VACUOLES reproduction. The process by which new cells are made is called cell division, There are two Vacuoles are storage sacs for solid or liquid main types of cell division: mitosis contents. Vacuoles are small sized in animal and meiosis. cells while plant cells have very large vacuoles. The process of cell division by which most The central vacuole of some plant cells may of the cells divide for growth is called mitosis. occupy 50-90% of the cell volume. In this process, cach cell called mother cell The Foxpamestat Unre or Liew 57 Reprint 2025-26 :

[Page 10]
SCIENCE58 5858 5858 What you have learnt · The fundamental organisational unit of life is the cell. · Cells are enclosed by a plasma membrane composed of lipids and proteins. · The cell membrane is an active part of the cell. It regulates the movement of materials between the ordered interior of the cell and the outer environment. · In plant cells, a cell wall composed mainly of cellulose is located outside the cell membrane. · The presence of the cell wall enables the cells of plants, fungi and bacteria to exist in hypotonic media without bursting. · The nucleus in eukaryotes is separated from the cytoplasm by double-layered membrane and it directs the life processes of the cell. · The ER functions both as a passageway for intracellular transport and as a manufacturing surface. · The Golgi apparatus consists of stacks of membrane-bound vesicles that function in the storage, modification and packaging of substances manufactured in the cell. · Most plant cells have large membranous organelles called plastids, which are of two types—chromoplasts and leucoplasts. Fig. 5.7: Fig. 5.7:Fig. 5.7: Fig. 5.7:Fig. 5.7: Mitosis Fig. 5.8: Fig. 5.8:Fig. 5.8: Fig. 5.8:Fig. 5.8: Meiosis divides to form two identical daughter cells (Fig. 5.7). The daughter cells have the same number of chromosomes as mother cell. It helps in growth and repair of tissues in organisms. Specific cells of reproductive organs or tissues in animals and plants divide to form gametes, which after fertilisation give rise to offspring. They divide by a different process called meiosis which involves two consecutive divisions. When a cell divides by meiosis it produces four new cells instead of just two (Fig. 5.8). The new cells only have half the number of chromosomes than that of the mother cells. Can you think as to why the chromosome number has reduced to half in daughter cells? Chromosomes Mother cell Mother cell Daughter cells Daughter cells Meiosis-I Meiosis-II Reprint 2025-26
Chromosomes Meiosis I Al Z) Meiosis-1 Q) o73 a“ >< CTD Daughter a P) a ere 7 $3 Mother cell \ { ] Mother cell Fig. 5.7: Mitosis Fig. 5.8: Meiosis \3 divides to form two identical daughter cells — They divide by a different process called (Fig. 5.7). The daughter cells have the same meiosis which involves two consecutive number of chromosomes as mother cell. It divisions. When a cell divides by meiosis it helps in growth and repair of tissues — produces four new cells instead of just two Fig. in organisms. 5.8). The new cells only have half the number Specific cells of reproductive organs or tissues of chromosomes than that of the mother cells. in animals and plants divide to form gametes. = Can you think as to why the chromosome which after fertilisation give rise to offspring. nurnber has reduced to half in daughter cells? Ld) What it / ‘earnt ° The fundamental organisational unit of life is the cell. e Cells are enclosed by a plasma membrane composed of lipids and proteins. ° The cell membrane is an active part of the cell. It regulates the movement of materials between the ordered interior of the cell and the outer environment. e In plant cells, a cell wall composed mainly of cellulose is located outside the cell membrane. ° The presence of the cell wall enables the cells of plants, fungi and bacteria to exist in hypotonic media without bursting. ° The nucleus in eukaryotes is separated from the cytoplasm by double-layered membrane and it directs the life processes of the cell. ° The ER functions both as a passageway for intracellular transport and as a manufacturing surface. e The Golgi apparatus consists of stacks of membrane-bound vesicles that function in the storage, modification and packaging of substances manufactured in the cell. ° Most plant cells have large membranous organelles called plastids, which are of two types—chromoplasts and leucoplasts. 58 SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26

[Page 11]
THE FUNDAMENTAL UNIT OF LIFE 59 • Chromoplasts that contain chlorophyll are called chloroplasts and they perform photosynthesis. • The primary function of leucoplasts is storage. • Most mature plant cells have a large central vacuole that helps to maintain the turgidity of the cell and stores important substances including wastes. • Prokaryotic cells have no membrane-bound organelles, their chromosomes are composed of only nucleic acid, and they have only very small ribosomes as organelles. • Cells in organisms divide for growth of body, for repalcing dead cells, and for forming gametes for reproduction. Exercises 1. Make a comparison and write down ways in which plant cells are different from animal cells. 2. How is a prokaryotic cell different from a eukaryotic cell? 3. What would happen if the plasma membrane ruptures or breaks down? 4. What would happen to the life of a cell if there was no Golgi apparatus? 5. Which organelle is known as the powerhouse of the cell? Why? 6. Where do the lipids and proteins constituting the cell membrane get synthesised? 7. How does an Amoeba obtain its food? 8. What is osmosis? 9. Carry out the following osmosis experiment: Take four peeled potato halves and scoos each one out to make potato cups. One of these potato cups should be made from a boiled potato. Put each potato cup in a trough containing water. Now, • (a) Keep cup A empty (b) Put one teaspoon sugar in cup B (c) Put one teaspoon salt in cup C (d) Put one teaspoon sugar in the boiled potato cup D. Keep these for two hours. Then observe the four potato cups and answer the following: (i) Explain why water gathers in the hollowed portion of B and C. (ii) Why is potato A necessary for this experiment? (iii) Explain why water does not gather in the hollowed out portions of A and D. 10. Which type of cell division is required for growth and repair of body and which type is involved in formation of gametes? Reprint 2025-26
° Chromoplasts that contain chlorophyll are called chloroplasts and they perform photosynthesis. ° The primary function of leucoplasts is storage. ° Most mature plant cells have a large central vacuole that helps to maintain the turgidity of the cell and stores important substances including wastes. ° Prokaryotie cells have no membrane-bound organelles, their chromosomes are composed of only nucleic acid, and they have only very small ribosomes as organelles. ° Cells in organisms divide for growth of body, for repaleing dead cells, and for forming gametes for reproduction. . Exercises cy 1. Make a comparison and write down ways in which plant ' ee cells are different from animal cells. LV 2. How is a prokaryotic cell different from a eukaryotic cell’? ee 3. What would happen if the plasma membrane ruptures or breaks down? 4, What would happen to the life of a cell if there was no Golgi apparatus? 5. Which organelle is known as the powerhouse of the cell? Why? 6. Where do the lipids and proteins constituting the cell membrane get synthesised? 7. How does an Amocha obtain its food? 8. What is osmosis? 9. Carry out the following osmosis experiment: ° Take four peeled potato halves and scoos each one out to make potato cups. One of these potato cups should be made from a boiled potato. Put each potato cup ina trough containing water. Now, (a) Keep cup A empty (b) Put one teaspoon sugar in cup B (ce) Put one teaspoon salt in cup C (d) Put one teaspoon sugar in the boiled potato cup D. Keep these for two hours. Then observe the four potato eups and answer the following: (i) Explain why water gathers in the hollowed portion of B and C. (ii) Why is potato A necessary for this experiment? (iii) Explain why water does not gather in the hollowed out portions of A and D. 10. Which type of cell division is required for growth and repair of body and which type is involved in formation of gametes? Tht, Puanasenta Csr ov Lire 59 Reprint 2025-26 :