[Page 9]
SCIENCE68 [Fig. 6.11(a)]. These muscles are also called skeletal muscles as they are mostly attached to bones and help in body movement. Under the microscope, these muscles show alternate light and dark bands or striations when stained appropriately. As a r esult, they ar e also called striated muscles. The cells of this tissue are long, cylindrical, unbranched and multinucleate (having many nuclei). The movement of food in the alimentary canal or the contraction and relaxation of blood vessels are involuntary movements. We cannot really start them or stop them simply by wanting to do so! Smooth muscles [Fig. 6.11(b)] or involuntary muscles control such movements. They are also found in the iris of the eye, in ureters and in the bronchi of the lungs. The cells are long with pointed ends (spindle-shaped) and uninucleate (having a single nucleus). They are also called unstriated muscles – why would they be called that? The muscles of the heart show rhythmic contraction and relaxation throughout life. These involuntary muscles are called cardiac muscles [Fig. 6.11(c)]. Heart muscle cells are cylindrical, branched and uninucleate. Activity 6.5 Compare the structures of different types of muscular tissues. Note down their shape, number of nuclei and position of nuclei within the cell in the Table 6.1. Table 6.1: Features Striated Smooth Cardiac Shape Number of nuclei Position of nuclei 6.3.4 NERVOUS TISSUE All cells possess the ability to respond to stimuli. However, cells of the nervous tissue are highly specialised for being stimulated and Muscles contain special proteins called contractile proteins, which contract and relax to cause movement. Fig. 6.11: Types of muscles fibres: (a) striated muscle, (b) smooth muscle, (c) cardiac muscle We can move some muscles by conscious will. Muscles present in our limbs move when we want them to, and stop when we so decide. Such muscles are called voluntary muscles (c) Striations Nuclei Spindle shaped muscle cell Nucleus (b) Nuclei Striations (a) Reprint 2025-26
Muscles contain special proteins called (Fig. 6.11 (a)]. These muscles are also called contractile proteins, which contract and relax — skeletal muscles as they are mostly attached to cause Movement. to bones and help in body movement. Under Suter the microscope, these muscles show alternate - light and dark bands or striations when Ney /\ Strations stained appropriately. As a result, they are er ey eke Lp also called striated muscles. The cells of this ade he Dipsgeht te tissue are long, cylindrical, unbranched and ~ ee + multinucleate (having many nuclei). @ The movement of food in the alimentary canal or the contraction and relaxation of blood Spindle shaped vessels are involuntary movements. We cannot muscle celta really start them or stop them simply by may De... _—_ ee ee wanting to do so! Smooth muscles [Fig. ———— = = Sey esa E- 6.1 1{b)] or involuntary muscles control such a —— ——— movements. They are also found in the iris of eg SSS the eye, in ureters and in the bronchi of the re —_ ————— lungs. The cells are long with pointed ends = RD ae (spindle-shaped) and uninucleate (having a note SES So . Sa SS See 2 single nucleus). They are also called unstriated —= — ey wuek muscles - why would they be called that? nelens a ae The muscles of the heart show rhythmic ©) contraction and relaxation throughout life. These involuntary muscles are called cardiac ae muscles (Fig. 6.1 1(c)]. Heart muscle cells are aay cea TELE, eee cylindrical, branched and uninucleate. eal Bld geet Striations oe cB ae Activity 6.5 Bee Gece er ics ~ 3 gS Sit 9a Sie ee Pega kg pe Hg = Compare the structures of different pve Saat Ned gee types of muscular tissues, Note down ic, FAR ta Ghee el their shape, number of nuclei and Secs RAs geemeiey > Sle osition of nuclei within the cell in Sah See BS ae the Table 6.1. ee ce ed Ba Rad cal feet hora Table 6.1: core pate a8 SR Features Striated | Smooth | Cardiac ee Gel pes per Shar aes Gaal Number of nuclei ©) Position of nuclei Fig. 6.11: Types oftiiscles fibres: fa] strated muscle, ()} stnooth imiscle, (cf cardiac muscle 6.3.4 NERVOUS TISSUE We can move some muscles by conscious will. Muscles present in our limbs move when All cells possess the ability to respond to we want them to, and stop when we so decide. — stimuli. However, cells of the nervous tissue Such muscles are called voluntary muscles are highly specialised for being stimulated and 68 Science. Reprint 2025-26

[Page 10]
TISSUES 69 69696969 branched parts (processes) called dendrites. An individual nerve cell may be up to a metre long. Many nerve fibres bound together by connective tissue make up a nerve. The signal that passes along the nerve fibre is called a nerve impulse. The nerve impulse from the nerve endings in transmitted to the dendrites of the next nerve cell. Nerve impulses allow us to move our muscles when we want to. The functional combination of nerve and muscle tissue is fundamental to most animals. This combination enables animals to move rapidly in response to stimuli. uestions 1. Name the tissue responsible for movement in our body. 2. What does a neuron look like? 3. Give three features of cardiac muscles. 4. What are the functions of areolar tissue? Q Nucleus Dendrite Axon Nerve ending Cell body Fig. 6.12: Fig. 6.12:Fig. 6.12: Fig. 6.12:Fig. 6.12: Neuron—a unit of nervous tissue then transmitting the stimulus very rapidly from one place to another within the body. The brain, spinal cord and nerves are all composed of the nervous tissue. The cells of this tissue are called nerve cells or neurons. A neuron consists of a cell body with a nucleus and cytoplasm, from which long thin hair -like parts arise (Fig. 6.12). Usually each neuron has a single long part (process) in the form of a fibre, called the axon, and many short, What you have learnt • Tissue is a group of cells similar in structure and function. • Plant tissues are of two main types – meristematic and permanent. • Meristematic tissue is the dividing tissue present in the growing regions of the plant. • Permanent tissues are derived from meristematic tissue once they lose the ability to divide. They are classified as simple and complex tissues. • Parenchyma, collenchyma and sclerenchyma are three types of simple tissues. Xylem and phloem are types of complex tissues. • Animal tissues can be epithelial, connective, muscular and nervous tissue. • Depending on shape and function, epithelial tissue is classified as squamous, cuboidal, columnar , ciliated and glandular. Reprint 2025-26
then transmitting the stimulus very rapidly — branched parts (processes) called dendrites. from one place to another within the body. The An individual nerve cell may be up te a metre brain, spinal cord and nerves are all composed long. Many nerve fibres bound together by of the nervous tissue. The cells of this tissue connective tissue make up a nerve. are called nerve cells or neurons. A neuron The signal that passes along the nerve fibre consists of a cell body with a nucleus and is called a nerve impulse. The nerve impulse cytoplasm, from which long thin hairlike — from the nerve endings in transmitted to the parts arise (Fig. 6.12). Usually each neuron — dendrites of the next nerve cell. Nerve has a single long part (process) in the form of impulses allow us to move our muscles when a fibre. called the axon, and many short. we want to. The functional combination of Sucleus nerve and muscle tissue is fundamental to Nucleus my most animals. This combination enables . ( ‘ Sh yendrite animals to move rapidly in resporise to stimuli. y cin, rs he . : . westious ’ ; Axon Nerv <a | | 2. Name the tissue responsible for B Nerve ending .. , \ ; Ne movement in our body. a 2. What does a neuron look ke? Cell body 3. Give three features of cardiac Fig. 6.12: Neuron—a unit of nervous tissuc ittuiscles. ©) 1. What are the functions of areolar issue? [) What o FA a you have fF mew / learnt ° ~ ° Tissue is a group of cells similar in structure and function. ° Plant tissues are of two main types - meristematic and permanent. ° Meristematic tissue is the dividing tissue present in the growing regions of the plant. ° Permanent tissues are derived from meristematic tissue once they lose the ability to divide. They are classified as simple and complex tissues. ° Parenchyma, collenchyma and sclerenchyma are three types of simple tissues. Xylem and phloem are types of complex tissues. ° Animal tissues can be epithelial, connective. muscular and nervous tissue. ° Depending on shape and function, epithelial tissue is classified as squamous, cuboidal, columnar, ciliated and glandular. TIssces 69 Reprint 2025-26

[Page 11]
SCIENCE70 • The different types of connective tissues in our body include areolar tissue, adipose tissue, bone, tendon, ligament, cartilage and blood. • Striated, unstriated and cardiac are three types of muscle tissues. • Nervous tissue is made of neurons that receive and conduct impulses. Exercises 1. Define the term “tissue”. 2. How many types of elements together make up the xylem tissue? Name them. 3. How are simple tissues different from complex tissues in plants? 4. Differentiate between parenchyma, collenchyma and sclerenchyma on the basis of their cell wall. 5. What are the functions of the stomata? 6. Diagrammatically show the difference between the three types of muscle fibres. 7. What is the specific function of the cardiac muscle? 8. Differentiate between striated, unstriated and cardiac muscles on the basis of their structure and site/location in the body. 9. Draw a labelled diagram of a neuron. 10. Name the following. (a) Tissue that for ms the inner lining of our mouth. (b) Tissue that connects muscle to bone in humans. (c) Tissue that transports food in plants. (d) Tissue that stor es fat in our body. (e) Connective tissue with a fluid matrix. (f) Tissue pr esent in the brain. 11. Identify the type of tissue in the following: skin, bark of tree, bone, lining of kidney tubule, vascular bundle. Reprint 2025-26
° The different types of connective tissues in our body include areolar tissue, adipose tissue, bone, tendon, ligament, cartilage and blood. 3 Striated, unstriated and cardiac are three types of muscle tissucs. ° Nervous tissue is made of neurons that receive and conduct impulses. . | __s—d)sé&Exerrcises a “s 1. Define the term “tissue”. | ve ae 2. How many types of clements together make up the xylem SS tissue? Name them. “a 3. How are simple tissues different from complex tissues in plants? 4. Differentiate between parenchyma, collenchyma and sclerenchyma on the basis of their cell wall. 5. What are the functions of the stomata? 6. Diagrammatically show the difference between the three types of muscle fibres. 7. What is the specific function of the cardiac muscle? 8. Differentiate between striated, unstriated and cardiac muscles on the basis of their structure and site/location in the body. 9. Draw a labelled diagram of a neuron. 10. Name the following. (a) Tissue that forms the inner lining of our mouth. (b) Tissue that connects muscle to bone in humans. (ec) Tissue that transports food in plants. {d) Tissue that stores fat in our body. (e) Connective tissue with a fluid matrix. (f) Tissue present in the brain. 11. Identify the type of tissue in the following: skin, bark of tree, bone, lining of kidney tubule, vascular bundle. 70 Sewer, : Reprint 2025-26

[Page 12]
TISSUES 71 12. Name the regions in which parenchyma tissue is present. 13. What is the role of epidermis in plants? 14. How does the cork act as a protective tissue? 15. Complete the following chart: Reprint 2025-26
12. Name the regions in which parenchyma tissue is present. 13. What is the role of epidermis in plants? 14. How does the cork act as a protective tissue? 15. Complete the following chart: | Permanent tissue C7 7 -_ Tisst eS 71 Reprint 2025-26