[Page 7]
SCIENCE66 Fig. 6.9: Different types of epithelial tissues of skin). Simple squamous epithelial cells are extremely thin and flat and form a delicate lining. The oesophagus and the lining of the mouth are also covered with squamous epithelium. The skin, which protects the body, is also made of squamous epithelium. Skin epithelial cells are arranged in many layers to prevent wear and tear. Since they are arranged in a pattern of layers, the epithelium is called stratified squamous epithelium. Where absorption and secretion occur, as in the inner lining of the intestine, tall epithelial cells are present. This columnar (meaning ‘pillar-like’) epithelium facilitates movement across the epithelial barrier. In the respiratory tract, the columnar epithelial tissue also has cilia, which ar e hair-like projections on the outer surfaces of epithelial cells. These cilia can move, and their movement pushes the mucus forward to clear it. This type of epithelium is thus ciliated columnar epithelium. Cuboidal epithelium (with cube-shaped cells) forms the lining of kidney tubules and ducts of salivary glands, where it provides mechanical support. Epithelial cells often acquire additional specialisation as gland cells, which can secrete substances at the epithelial surface. Sometimes a portion of the epithelial tissue folds inward, and a multicellular gland is formed. This is glandular epithelium. 6.3.2 CONNECTIVE TISSUE Blood is a type of connective tissue. Why would it be called ‘connective’ tissue? A clue is provided in the introduction of this chapter! Now, let us look at this type of tissue in some more detail. The cells of connective tissue are loosely spaced and embedded in an intercellular matrix (Fig. 6.10). The matrix may be jelly like, fluid, dense or rigid. The nature of matrix differs in concordance with the function of the particular connective tissue. Activity 6.4 Take a drop of blood on a slide and observe different cells present in it under a microscope. of epithelium. This is called the simple squamous epithelium (squama means scale (a) Squamous (b) Stratified squamous (c) Cuboidal (d) Columnar (Ciliated) Reprint 2025-26
of epithelium. This is called the simple — of skin). Simple squamous epithelial cells are squamous epithelium (squama means scale — extremely thin and flat and form a delicate lining. The oesophagus and the lining of the a ee | mouth are also covered with squamous ae 7 we Pear epithelium. The skin, which protects the body, Pee a ea ge is also made of squamous epithelium. Skin ae To 9 _ a epithelial cells are arranged in many layers to fa) Squamous prevent wear and tear, Since they are arranged ina pattern of layers, the epithelium is called stratified squamous epithelium. : nd n _ “tt == gf Where absorption and secretion occur, as oe var a A in the inner lining of the intestine, tall epithelial ° wo Los cells are present. This columnar (meaning 7 os 2 ee ‘pillar-like’) epithelium facilitates movement ew. 5 nt Sate across the epithelial barrier. In the respiratory Soe ERT AGS tract, the columnar epithelial tissue also has Loe, 4 a pd 5 ‘lia. which are hair- ‘tions 8 ox ham sang: cilia, which are hair-like projec tions on the aa Nels “¥ eee GSA outer surfaces of epithelial cells. These cilia can ote Pi ae Br move, and their movement pushes the mucus rite Pepegen ss Sg forward to clear it. This type of epithelium is ee tat yaks Sy thus ciliated columnar epithelium. : eevee y ite {ip Cuboidal epithelium (with cube-shaped ws a 2) lo EY, cells) forms the lining of kidney tubules and ‘ — — ~ .e . 2 a ducts of salivary glands, where it provides Ib) Stratified squamous mechanical support. Epithelial cells often acquire additional specialisation as gland cells, — = — which can secrete substances at the epithelial a dea en A surface. Sometimes a portion of the epithelial a, of ae ee tissue folds inward, and a multicellular gland LF Ce Fe OF “ato is formed. This is glandular epithelium. pe a a a a, £2 ° ae hes? 2 fe ta ee aa 6.3.2 CONNECTIVE ‘TISSUE alae care antieiiert., ::o a ie oe iH Blood is a type of connective tissue. Why would ~ it be called ‘connective’ tissue? A clue is fe] Cubardal provided in the introduction of this chapter! Now. let us look at this type of tissue in some more detail. The cells of connective tissue are <<. loosely spaced and embedded in an awe te e a intercellular matrix (Fig. 6.10). The matrix may Pe) te sng dpe 8 7" . be jelly like, fluid, dense or rigid. The nature P "a ¥ : ghis of matrix differs in concordance with the carrer ca ot oae aes function of the particular connective tissue. &4 Sos t ead f : a . Activity 6.4 (a) Colunmar [Chated) e = =‘Take a drop of blood on a slide and observe different cells present in it Fig. 6.9: Different tvpes of epithelial tissues under a microscope. 66 Science. Reprint 2025-26

[Page 8]
TISSUES 67 Blood has a fluid (liquid) matrix called plasma, in which red blood corpuscles (RBCs), white blood corpuscles (WBCs) and platelets are suspended. The plasma contains proteins, salts and hormones. Blood flows and transports gases, digested food, hor mones and waste materials to different parts of the body. Bone is another example of a connective tissue. It forms the framework that supports the body. It also anchors the muscles and supports the main organs of the body. It is a strong and nonflexible tissue (what would be the advantage of these pr operties for bone functions?). Bone cells ar e embedded in a hard matrix that is composed of calcium and phosphorus compounds. Two bones can be connected to each other by another type of connective tissue called the ligament. This tissue is very elastic. It has considerable str ength. Ligaments contain very little matrix and connect bones with bones. Tendons connect muscles to bones and are another type of connective tissue. Tendons are fibrous tissue with great strength but limited flexibility. Another type of connective tissue, cartilage, has widely spaced cells. The solid matrix is composed of pr oteins and sugars. Cartilage smoothens bone surfaces at joints and is also present in the nose, ear, trachea and larynx. We can fold the cartilage of the ears, but we cannot bend the bones in our arms. Think of how the two tissues are different! Areolar connective tissue is found between the skin and muscles, around blood vessels and nerves and in the bone marr ow. It fills the space inside the organs, supports internal organs and helps in repair of tissues. Where are fats stor ed in our body? Fat- storing adipose tissue is found below the skin and between internal organs. The cells of this tissue are filled with fat globules. Storage of fats also lets it act as an insulator. 6.3.3 MUSCULAR TISSUE Muscular tissue consists of elongated cells, also called muscle fibres. This tissue is responsible for movement in our body. Fig. 6.10: Types of connective tissues: (a) types of blood cells, (b) compact bone, (c) hyaline cartilage, (d) areolar tissue, (e) adipose tissue (a) Different white blood corpuscles Neutrophil (polynuclear leucocyte) BasophilEosinophil Nucleus Cytoplasm Lymphocyte Monocyte Platelets Haversian canal (contains blood vessels and nerve fibres) Canaliculus (contains slender process of bone cell or osteocyte) Hyaline matrix Chondrocyte Red blood corpuscle (b) (c) Reticular fibre Fibroblast Macrophage Collagen fibre Mast cell Plasma cell (d) Fat droplet Nucleus Adipocyte (e) Reprint 2025-26
Cytuplionr Blood has a fluid (liquid) matrix called oN rhe Naceus plasma, in which red blood corpuscles (RBCs), ( Doe DD oe. white blood corpuscles (WBCs) and platelets wie sega Mead are suspended. The plasma contains proteins, Different white \tuiarmato salts and hormones. Blood flows and blood corpuscles a transports gases. digested food, hormones nn and waste materials to different parts of \ JI ee. ay the body. \ vee Nee Bone is another example of a connective eee rants Matcste tissue. It forms the framework that supports Haversian carnal the body. It also anchors the muscles and (cantains blood vessels Chondrocyte supports the main organs of the body. It is a and nerve fibres) : S strong and nonflexible issue (what would be PN Hysaline matray 35 “S the advantage of these properties for bone . Ue 1 <z functions?). Bone cells are embedded in a PERN: Coe) 6, & hard matrix that is composed of calcium and FY Or aN § phosphorus compounds. Ne? M ‘analtenlus (contains ©) Two bones can be connected to each other NINE, “ence races ot ane by another type of connective tissue called the 0 a ligament. This tissue is very elastic. It has conic — considerable strength. Ligaments contain very little matrix and connect bones with Reteular bre Fibroblast bones. Tendons connect muscles to bones and | See ti x a ; are another type of connective tissue. Tendons etal. ARS eae are fibrous tissue with great strength but 2 ees. A ence. limited flexibility. a ae, PAI og SS: Another type of connective tissue, } GP ts ar > ad ; : ; cartilage, has widely spaced cells. The solid fee i: matrix is composed of proteins and sugars. Macrophage gg foe $3 ae Cartilage smoothens bone surfaces at joints al ony “ ° and is also present in the nose, ear, trachea Callagen fibre Mast ‘et plawnecet and larynx. We can fold the cartilage of the ears, iP _ but we cannot bend the bones in our arms. . Nucleus Think of how the two tissues are different! Par droplet Areolar connective tissue is found between oe ' als : f the skin and muscles, around blood vessels ot. / a Pit ‘ty |: “ and nerves and in the bone marrow. It fills 4 & RY a iG Cn ay! the space inside the organs, supports internal Reef . Reged AR é 24 organs and helps in repair of tissues. i fo NS "a y Where are fats stored in our body? Fat- ! ag? Mas ‘ yi storing adipose tissue is found below the skin . ok AR < y and between internal organs. The cells of this i Qe BK aT 4 tissue are filled with fat globules. Storage of i ers we fats also lets it act as an insulator. cS te Adipacyte fc) 6.3.3 MUSCULAR ‘TISSUE Pig. 6.10: Types of connective tissties: fa} tvpes of blood Muscular tissue consists of elongated cells, cells, h} compact bone, (c} hyaline cartiaee. also called muscle fibres. This tissue is (dl) areolar tissue, (e] adipose Ussuie responsible for movement in our body. Tisst eS 67 Reprint 2025-26 :