[Page 1]
From the last chapter, we recall that all living organisms are made of cells. In unicellular organisms, a single cell per forms all basic functions. For example, in Amoeba, a single cell carries out movement, intake of food, gaseous exchange and excretion. But in multi- cellular organisms there are millions of cells. Most of these cells are specialised to carry out specific functions. Each specialised function is taken up by a different group of cells. Since these cells carry out only a particular function, they do it very efficiently. In human beings, muscle cells contract and relax to cause movement, nerve cells carry messages, blood flows to transport oxygen, food, hormones and waste material and so on. In plants, vascular tissues conduct food and water from one part of the plant to other parts. So, multi-cellular organisms show division of labour . Cells specialising in one function are often grouped together in the body. This means that a particular function is carried out by a cluster of cells at a definite place in the body. This cluster of cells, called a tissue, is arranged and designed so as to give the highest possible efficiency of function. Blood, phloem and muscle are all examples of tissues. A group of cells that are similar in structure and/or work together to achieve a particular function forms a tissue. 6.1 Are Plants and Animals Made of Same Types of Tissues? Let us compare their structure and functions. Do plants and animals have the same structur e? Do they both per form similar functions? There are noticeable differences between the two. Plants are stationary or fixed – they don’t move. Since they have to be upright, they have a large quantity of supportive tissue. The supportive tissue generally has dead cells. Animals on the other hand move around in sear ch of food, mates and shelter . They consume more energy as compared to plants. Most of the tissues they contain are living. Another difference between animals and plants is in the pattern of growth. The growth in plants is limited to certain regions, while this is not so in animals. There are some tissues in plants that divide throughout their life. These tissues are localised in certain regions. Based on the dividing capacity of the tissues, various plant tissues can be classified as growing or meristematic tissue and permanent tissue. Cell growth in animals is more uniform. So, there is no such demarcation of dividing and non- dividing regions in animals. The structural organisation of organs and organ systems is far more specialised and localised in complex animals than even in very complex plants. This fundamental difference reflects the different modes of life pursued by these two major groups of organisms, particularly in their different feeding methods. Also, they are differently adapted for a sedentary existence on one hand (plants) and active locomotion on the other (animals), contributing to this difference in organ system design. It is with reference to these complex animal and plant bodies that we will now talk about the concept of tissues in some detail. 6 T TT TTISSUES ISSUESISSUES ISSUESISSUES C hapter Reprint 2025-26
“eal C hapter 6 OFs, noes From the last chapter, we recall that all living There are noticeable differences hetween organisms are made of cells. In unicellular — the two. Plants are stationary or fixed - they organisms, a single cell performs all basic — don't move. Since they have to be upright, they functions. For example, in Amoeba, a single have a large quantity of supportive tissue. The cell carries out movement, intake of food, supportive tissue generally has dead cells. gaseous exchange and excretion. But in multi- Animals on the other hand move around cellular organisms there are millions of cells. in search of food, mates and shelter. They Most of these cells are specialised to carry out . . oe . vente . consume more energy as compared to plants. specific functions. Each specialised function aa tice . . Most of the tissues they contain are living. is taken up by a different group of cells. Since Another diff *t animals and these cells carry out only a particular function, nother ciflerence between an! mais ani . « sie Tats > Sy e 5s they do it very efficiently. In human beings. plants is in the pattern of growth. The growth muscle cells contract and relax to cause in plants is limited to certain regions, while this movement, nerve cells carry messages, blood is not so in animals. There are some tissues in flows to transport oxygen, food, hormones and Plants that divide throughout their life. These waste material and so on. In plants, vascular tissues are localised in certain regions. Based Ussues conduct food and water from one part on the dividing capacity of the tissues, various of the plant to other parts. So, multi-cellular plant tissues can be classified as growing or organisms show division of labour. Cells meristematic tissue and permanent tissue. Cell specialising in one function are often grouped growth in animals is more uniform. So, there together in the body. This means that a jg no such demarcation of dividing and non- particular function is carried out by a cluster dividing regions in animals. of cells at a definite place in the body. This "Map & . varniee: mee The structural organisation of organs and cluster of cells, called a tissue, is arranged and . a oe | . . a organ systems is far more specialised and designed so as to give the highest possible loralised i 1 imals th ; efficiency of function. Blood. phloem and oe AMSEC ne comprex an mals aan even in very muscle are all examples of tissues. complex plants. This fundamental difference A group of cells that are similar in structure "éflects the different modes of life pursued by and/or work together to achieve a particular these two major groups of organisms, function forms a tissue. particularly in their different feeding methods. Also, they are differently adapted for a 6.1 Are Plants and Animals Made — sedentary existence on one hand (plants) and f S T f Ti > active locomotion on the other (animals), oF same lypes 0 Issues: contributing to this difference in organ system Let us compare their structure and functions. design. Do plants and animals have the same It is with reference to these complex animal structure? Do they both perform similar and plant bodies that we will now talk about functions? the concept of tissues in some detail. Reprint 2025-26

[Page 2]
Lateral meristem uestions 1. What is a tissue? 2. What is the utility of tissues in multi-cellular organisms? 6.2 Plant Tissues 6.2.1 MERISTEMATIC TISSUE • From the above observations, answer the following questions: 1. Which of the two onions has longer roots? Why? 2. Do the roots continue growing even after we have removed their tips? 3. Why would the tips stop growing in jar 2 after we cut them? The growth of plants occurs only in certain specific regions. This is because the dividing tissue, also known as meristematic tissue, is located only at these points. Depending on the r egion where they are pr esent, meristematic tissues are classified as apical, lateral and inter calary (Fig. 6.2). New cells produced by meristem are initially like those of meristem itself, but as they grow and mature, their characteristics slowly change and they become differentiated as components of other tissues. Fig. 6.1: Growth of roots in onion bulbs Activity ______________ 6.1 • Take two glass jars and fill them with water. • Now, take two onion bulbs and place one on each jar , as shown in Fig. 6.1. • Observe the growth of roots in both the bulbs for a few days. • Measure the length of roots on day 1, 2 and 3. • On day 4, cut the root tips of the onion bulb in jar 2 by about 1 cm. After this, observe the growth of roots in both the jars and measur e their lengths each day for five more days and record the observations in tables, like the table below: Length Day 1 Day 2 Day 3 Day 4 Day 5 Jar 1 Jar 2 Q Apical meristem is present at the growing tips of stems and roots and increases the length of the stem and the root. The girth of the stem or root increases due to lateral meristem (cambium). Intercalary meristem seen in some plants is located near the node. Fig. 6.2: Location of meristematic tissue in plant body Jar 1 Jar 2 TISSUES 61 Apical meristem Intercalary meristem Reprint 2025-26
beha : . From the above observations, answer M we sl ONS the following questions: fh. Whatis a dssuc? 1. Which of the two onions has longer | 20 What is the utility of dssucs in roots? Why? | mnulti-celular organisms? 2. Do the roots continue growing even after we have removed their a tips? 3. Why would the tips stop growing 6.2 Plant Tissues in jar 2 after we cut then? The growth of plants occurs only in certain 6.2.1 MERISTEMATIC TISSUE, specific regions. This is because the dividing tissue. also known as meristematic tissue, is , " located only at these points. Depending on EN AN the region where they are present, i. i. . meristematic tissues are classified as apical, Te, Rene 2) lateral and intercalary (Fig. 6.2). New cells ~~ Ae WH produced by meristem are initially like those of meristem itself, but as they grow and mature, their characteristics slowly change and they become differentiated as components of other Ussues. ——$[— Apical meristem 0 Jar] Jar 2 uy Fig. 6.1: Growth of roots in onion bulbs . —_ Interealary menstem Activity 6.1 “ . Take two glass jars and fill them with water. . Now, take two onion bulbs and place one on each jar, as shown in Fig. 6.1. . Observe the growth of roots in both the bulbs for a few days. ° Measure the length of roots on day 1, 2 and 3. ° On day 4. cut the root tips of the onion bulb in jar 2 by about 1 cm. After this, Lateral meristem observe the growth of roots in both the jars and measure their lengths each day for five more days and record the . observations in tables, like the table Fig. 6.2: Location of ineristematic tissue in plant body below: Apical meristem is present at the growing tips of stems and roots and increases the length of the stem and the root. The girth of the stem or root increases due to lateral meristem (cambium). Intercalary meristem seen in some plants is located near the node. Tisst eS 61 Reprint 2025-26 :