[Page 3]
SCIENCE62 Cuticle Epidermis Collenchyma Parenchyma Phloem Vascular bundle Xylem Fig. 6.3: Section of a stem Cells of meristematic tissue are very active, they have dense cytoplasm, thin cellulose walls and prominent nuclei. They lack vacuoles. Can we think why they would lack vacuoles? (You might want to refer to the functions of vacuoles in the chapter on cells.) 6.2.2 PERMANENT TISSUE What happens to the cells formed by meristematic tissue? They take up a specific role and lose the ability to divide. As a result, they form a permanent tissue. This process of taking up a permanent shape, size, and a function is called differentiation. Differentiation leads to the development of various types of permanent tissues. 3. Can we think of reasons why there would be so many types of cells? • We can also try to cut sections of plant roots. We can even try cutting sections of root and stem of different plants. 6.2.2 (i) SIMPLE PERMANENT TISSUE A few layers of cells beneath the epidermis are generally simple permanent tissue. Parenchyma is the most common simple permanent tissue. It consists of relatively unspecialised cells with thin cell walls. They are living cells. They are usually loosely arranged, thus large spaces between cells (intercellular spaces) are found in this tissue (Fig. 6.4 a). This tissue generally stores food. Activity ______________ 6.2 • Take a plant stem and with the help of your teacher cut into very thin slices or sections. • Now, stain the slices with safranin. Place one neatly cut section on a slide, and put a drop of glycerine. • Cover with a cover -slip and observe under a micr oscope. Observe the various types of cells and their arrangement. Compare it with Fig. 6.3. • Now, answer the following on the basis of your observation: 1. Are all cells similar in structure? 2. How many types of cells can be seen? In some situations, it contains chlorophyll and performs photosynthesis, and then it is called chlorenchyma. In aquatic plants, large air cavities are present in parenchyma to help them float. Such a parenchyma type is called aerenchyma. The flexibility in plants is due to another permanent tissue, collenchyma. It allows bending of various parts of a plant like tendrils and stems of climbers without breaking. It also provides mechanical support. We can find this tissue in leaf stalks below the epidermis. The cells of this tissue are living, elongated and irregularly thickened at the corners. There is very little intercellular space (Fig. 6.4 b). Reprint 2025-26
Cells of meristematic tissue are very active. 3. Can we think of reasons why there they have dense cytoplasm. thin cellulose walls would be so many types of cells? and prominent nuclei. They lack vacuoles. Can ° We can also try to cut sections of plant we think why they would lack vacuoles? (You roots. We can even try cutting sections might want to refer to the functions of vacuoles of root and stem of different plants. in the chapter on cells.) . 6.2.2 (i) SIMPLE PERMANENT TISSUE 6.2.2 PERMANENT ‘TISSUE A few layers of cells beneath the epidermis are What happens to the cells formed by generally simple permanent tissue. meristematic tissue? They take up a specific Parenchyma is the most common simple role and lose the ability to divide. Asaresult, — Permanent tissue. It consists of relatively they form a permanent tissue. This process unspecialised cells with thin cell walls. They of taking up a permanent shape. size, and a re living cells. They are usually loosely function is called differentiation. Differentiation @7Tanged, thus large spaces between cells leads to the development of various types of (intercellular spaces) are found in this tissue permanent tissues. (Fig. 6.4a). This tissue generally stores food. Cuticle ie IT ——- = Epidernms wage: fisess se Ba ASN PAW, Won << Collenchynia See Tee eaees or | AS aejteo pes OS ee eA ees Ay ork Us oD ee Parenchyma Sy Ae DS [East SS” CON \\ waa whee CP <B Pm LPF EIR Lh OF aSe oem Loy Cs ET « e EO OA sa Uekelete ston Btecnicaes te Xylem re ST) Vascular bundle ¥ “ Ma ~ Fig. 6.3: Section of a stein SA Activity 6.2 In some situations, it contains chlorophyll and . performs photosynthesis, and then it is called * Take a plant stem and with the help chlorenchyma. In aquatic plants, large air of your teacher cut into very thin slices cavities are present in parenchyma to help or sections. them float. Such a parenchyma type is called . Now, stain the slices with safranin. aerenchyma. Place one neatly cut section on a slide, The flexibility in plants is due to another and put a drop of glycerine. permanent tissue. collenchyma. It allows * Cover with a cover-slip and observe bending of various parts ofa plant like tendrils under a microscope. Observe the and stems of climbers without breaking. It various types of cells and their also provides mechanical support. We can find art angement. Compare it with Fig. 6.3. this tissue in leaf stalks below the epidermis. . Now, answer the following on the ay basis of your observation: The cells of this Ussue are living, elongated 1. Are all cells similar in structure? and irregularly thickened at the 2. How many types of cells can corners. There is very little intercellular space be seen? | {Fig. 6.4 b). 62 Science. Reprint 2025-26

[Page 4]
TISSUES 63 Fig. 6.4: Various types of simple tissues: (a) Parenchyma (b) Collenchyma (c) Sclerenchyma (i) transverse section, (ii) longitudinal section. Yet another type of per manent tissue is sclerenchyma. It is the tissue which makes the plant hard and stiff. We have seen the husk of a coconut. It is made of sclerenchymatous tissue. The cells of this tissue are dead. They are long and narrow as the walls are thickened due to lignin. Often these walls are so thick that there is no internal space inside the cell (Fig. 6.4 c). This tissue is present in stems, around vascular bundles, in the veins of leaves and in the hard covering of seeds and nuts. It provides strength to the plant parts. Activity ______________ 6.3 • Take a freshly plucked leaf of Rhoeo. • Stretch and break it by applying pressure. • While breaking it, keep it stretched gently so that some peel or skin projects out from the cut. • Remove this peel and put it in a petri dish filled with water . • Add a few drops of safranin. • Wait for a couple of minutes and then transfer it onto a slide. Gently place a cover slip over it. • Observe under microscope. What you observe is the outermost layer of cells, called epidermis. The epidermis is usually made of a single layer of cells. In some plants living in very dry habitats, the epidermis may be thicker since protection against water loss is critical. The entire surface of a plant has an outer covering epidermis. It protects all the parts of the plant. Epidermal cells on the aerial a Intercellular spaces b Wall thickenings Nucleus Vacuole Cell wall Narrow lumen Lignified thick wall c (ii) c (i) Thick lignified walls Fig. 6.5: Guard cells and epidermal cells: (a) lateral view, (b) surface view (a) (b) Guard cell Stoma Epidermal cell Guard cells parts of the plant often secrete a waxy, water- resistant layer on their outer surface. This aids in protection against loss of water, mechanical injury and invasion by parasitic fungi. Since it has a protective role to play, cells of epidermal tissue form a continuous layer without intercellular spaces. Most epidermal cells are relatively flat. Often their outer and side walls are thicker than the inner wall. We can observe small por es her e and there in the epidermis of the leaf. These pores are called stomata (Fig. 6.5). Stomata are enclosed by two kidney-shaped cells called guard cells. They are necessary for exchanging gases with the atmosphere. Transpiration (loss of water in the for m of water vapour) also takes place through stomata. Reprint 2025-26
Intercellular spaces a Wall thickenings A r= _—e Thick lignilied \ . a ‘acuolr walls i arrow lume a SS TE thick wall Oar : al ge PS \ Ww ~ i) \ a b el cw) Fig. 6.4: Various types of simple lissties: {a} Parenchyina (b} Collenchyina (c} Sclerenchyina (i) iransverse section, Gi) longitudinal section. Yet another type of permanent tissue is io sclerenchyma. It is the tissue which makes the eo plant hard and stiff. We have seen the husk of re a coconut. It is made of sclerenchymatous vr tissue. The cells of this tissue are dead. They le are long and narrow as the walls are thickened eo Guard SO \ oy 2 due to lignin. Often these walls are so thick Ce cells cals ™S} oO that there is no internal space inside the cell ~ LS Ne Stoma (Fig, 6.4 ¢). This tissue is present in stems, ae SG ——_ : —¢ Epidermal a around vascular bundles, in the veins of leaves i cell 7: } e., and in the hard covering of seeds and nuts. It . Ae Guard provides strength to the plant parts. (a) () Activity 6.3 Fig. 6.5: Guard cells and epidermat cells: (a} lateral ¢ ‘Take a freshly plucked leaf of Rhoco. View, (b} surface view . Stretch and break it by applying pressure. parts of the plant often secrete a waxy. water - ° While breaking it. keep it stretched resistant layer on their outer surface. This aids gently so that some peel or skin in protection against loss of water, mechanical projects out from the cut. i and invasi by parasitic f 44. Sine ¢ Remove this peel and put it in a petri njury and invasion by parasitic hingt. Since dish filled with water. it has a protective role to play, cells of * Add a tew drops of safranin. epidermal tissue form a continuous layer ¢ Wait for a couple of minutes and then without intercellular spaces. Most epidermal transfer it onto a slide. Gently place cells are relatively flat. Often their outer and a cover slip over it. side walls are thicker than the inner wall. ¢ Observe under microscope. We can observe small pores here and What you observe is the outermost layer _ there in the epidermis of the leaf. These pores of cells, called epidermis. The epidermis is are called stomata (Fig. 6.5). Stomata are usually made ofa single layer of cells. Insome enclosed by two kidney-shaped cells plants living in very dry habitats, the epidermis called guard cells. They are necessary for may be thicker since protection against water exchanging gases with the atmosphere. loss is critical. The entire surface ofa planthas — Transpiration (loss of water in the form of an outer covering epidermis. It protects allthe Water vapour) also” takes — place parts of the plant. Epidermal cells on the aerial through stomata. Tisst eS 63 Reprint 2025-26 :