[Page 5]
SCIENCE64 Recall which gas is required for photosynthesis. Find out the role of transpiration in plants. Epidermal cells of the roots, whose function is water absorption, commonly bear long hair- like parts that greatly increase the total absorptive surface area. In some plants like desert plants, epidermis has a thick waxy coating of cutin (chemical substance with waterproof quality) on its outer surface. Can we think of a reason for this? Is the outer layer of a branch of a tr ee different from the outer layer of a young stem? As plants grow older, the outer protective tissue undergoes certain changes. A strip of secondary meristem located in the cortex forms layers of cells which constitute the cork. Cells of cork are dead and compactly arranged without intercellular spaces (Fig. 6.6). They also have a substance called suberin in their walls that makes them impervious to gases and water. is a distinctive feature of the complex plants, one that has made possible their survival in the terrestrial environment. In Fig. 6.3 showing a section of stem, can you see different types of cells in the vascular bundle? Xylem consists of tracheids, vessels, xylem parenchyma (Fig. 6.7 a,b,c) and xylem fibres. Tracheids and vessels have thick walls, and many are dead cells when matur e. Tracheids and vessels are tubular structures. This allows them to transport water and minerals vertically. The parenchyma stores food. Xylem fibres are mainly supportive in function. Phloem is made up of five types of cells: sieve cells, sieve tubes, companion cells, phloem fibres and the phloem parenchyma [Fig. 6.7 (d)]. Sieve tubes are tubular cells with perforated walls. Phloem transports food from leaves to other parts of the plant. Except phloem fibres, other phloem cells are living cells. 6.2.2 (ii) COMPLEX PERMANENT TISSUE The different types of tissues we have discussed until now are all made of one type of cells, which look like each other. Such tissues are called simple permanent tissue. Yet another type of permanent tissue is complex tissue. Complex tissues are made of more than one type of cells. All these cells coordinate to perform a common function. Xylem and phloem are examples of such complex tissues. They are both conducting tissues and constitute a vascular bundle. Vascular tissue Fig. 6.6: Protective tissue Cork cells Ruptured epidermis Nucleus Cytoplasm Pits Pit (a) Tracheid (b) Vessel (c) Xylem parenchyma Fig. 6.7: Types of complex tissue Sieve plate Sieve tube Phloem parenchyma Companion cell (d) Section of phloem Reprint 2025-26
Recall which gas is required for isa aieuinetive reanure one complex Plants. photosynthesis. one | a as made possible t rei sure va n Find out the role of transpiration tn plants. the terrestrial environment. Int ig. 6.3 showing a section of stem, can you see different types Epidermal cells of the roots, whose function of cells in the vascular bundle’? is water absorption, commonly bear long hair- Xylem consists of tracheids, vessels, xylem like parts that greatly increase the total parenchyma (Fig. 6.7 a,b.c) and xylem fibres. absorptive surface area. Tracheids and vessels have thick walls, and In some plants like desert plants, many are dead cells when mature. Tracheids epidermis has a thick waxy coating of cutin and vessels are tubular structures. This allows (chemical substance with waterproof quality) — them to transport water and minerals on its outer surface. Can we think ofa reason vertically. The parenchyma stores food. Xylem for this? ; fibres are mainly supportive in function. Is the outer layer of a branch of a tree Phloem is made up of five types of cells: different from the outer layer ofa young stem? — gieve cells. sieve tubes. companion cells, As plants grow older, the outer protective phloem fibres and the phloem parenchyma lssue undergoes certain changes. A strip of (Fig. 6.7 (d)]. Sieve tubes are tubular cells with secondary meristem located in the cortex forms perforated walls. Phloem transports food from layers of cells whieh constitute mn cork. cells leaves to other parts of the plant. Except of cork are dead and compactly arranged phloem fibres. other phloem cells are living cells. without intercellular spaces (Fig. 6.6). They ° also have a substance called suberin in their Z ry ® KS i walls that makes them impervious to gases e RES HT ‘1 and water. bart Se | tpl Sucteus Cork cells Ruptured epidermis ~~ 298 | ot = : ! Og ae a ne 3|| feeeal aE? sits agp ED SD LJ - ® ‘eens - Ais oo an WY Bs a ei] keen 1 ne 6 We cies aaa a ee a e eet | a ee omg, ol: a niece, i gf -feyteplesn SD ES ® Teeead cae egy aut Gia wip @ eet ano mat On Qe SD ny ail ot GD Hee : Xn tee ~ —e a ae — CY Jatiatete > Se ee ee ee ee oa : Fig. 6.6: Protective tissue (a) ‘Tracheid (hb) Vessel (c) Xylem parenehytis 6.2.2 (ii) ComMPLEX PERMANENT TISSUE Bo TE Seve plate The different types of tissues we have discussed Steve tube until now are all made of one type of cells. a o” which look like each other. Such tissues are — pinoetn called simple permanent tissue. Yet another . 3 parenchyma type of permanent tissue is complex tissue. - Complex tissues are made of more than one 7 Campanton cell type of cells. All these cells coordinate to o perform a common function. Xylem and : phloem are examples of such complex tissues. ., : They are both conducting tissues and (a] Section of phlaem constitute a vascular bundle. Vascular tissue Fig. 6.7: [vpes of complex tissue 64 Science. Reprint 2025-26

[Page 6]
TISSUES 65 uestions 1. Name types of simple tissues. 2. Where is apical meristem found? 3. Which tissue makes up the husk of coconut? 4. What are the constituents of phloem? 6.3 Animal Tissues When we breathe we can actually feel the movement of our chest. How do these body parts move? For this we have specialised cells called muscle cells (Fig. 6.8). The contraction and relaxation of these cells result in movement. Q Fig. 6.8: Location of muscle fibres Smooth muscle fibres Smooth muscle fibre (Cell) Nucleus During breathing we inhale oxygen. Where does this oxygen go? It is absorbed in the lungs and then is transported to all the body cells through blood. Why would cells need oxygen? The functions of mitochondria we studied earlier provide a clue to this question. Blood flows and carries various substances from one part of the body to the other. For example, it carries oxygen and food to all cells. It also collects wastes from all parts of the body and carries them to the liver and kidney for disposal. Blood and muscles are both examples of tissues found in our body. On the basis of the functions they perform we can think of different types of animal tissues, such as epithelial tissue, connective tissue, muscular tissue and nervous tissue. Blood is a type of connective tissue, and muscle forms muscular tissue. 6.3.1 EPITHELIAL TISSUE The covering or protective tissues in the animal body are epithelial tissues. Epithelium covers most organs and cavities within the body. It also forms a barrier to keep different body systems separate. The skin, the lining of the mouth, the lining of blood vessels, lung alveoli and kidney tubules are all made of epithelial tissue. Epithelial tissue cells are tightly packed and form a continuous sheet. They have only a small amount of cementing material between them and almost no intercellular spaces. Obviously, anything entering or leaving the body must cross at least one layer of epithelium. As a result, the permeability of the cells of various epithelia play an important role in regulating the exchange of materials between the body and the external environment and also between different parts of the body. Regardless of the type, all epithelium is usually separated from the underlying tissue by an extracellular fibrous basement membrane. Different epithelia (Fig. 6.9) show differing structures that correlate with their unique functions. For example, in cells lining blood vessels or lung alveoli, where transportation of substances occurs through a selectively permeable surface, there is a simple flat kind Reprint 2025-26
(" westious During breathing we inhale oxygen. Where | re Se does this oxygen go? It is absorbed in the lungs ) 2. Name wpes of simple tissues, and then is transported to all the body cells 2. Where is apical meristem found? through blood. Why would cells need oxygen? 3 Which dssue makes up tic husk The functions of mitochondria we studied | of coconut? , earlier provide a clue to this question. Blood UJ 4. What are the constituents of flows and carries various substances from one phioen? part of the body to the other. For example. it carries oxygen and food to all cells. It also . . collects wastes from all parts of the body and 6.3 Animal Tissues carries them to the liver and kidney for disposal. When we breathe we can actually feel the Blood and muscles are both examples of movement of our chest. How do these body tissues found in our body. On the basis of the parts move? For this we have specialised cells g netions they perform we can think of different called muscle cells (Fig. 6.8). The contraction types of animal tissues, such as epithelial and relaxation of these cells result tissue, connective tissue, muscular tissue and in movement. nervous tissue. Blood is a type of connective em tissue, and muscle forms muscular tissue. Stomach 6.3.1 EPrrHELIAL TISSUE. et, The covering or protective tissues in the animal £ Pe body are epithelial tissues. Epithelium covers : we es most organs and cavities within the body. It ore. ae also forms a barrier to keep different body systems separate. The skin, the lining of the mouth, the lining of blood vessels, lung alveoli beg and kidney tubules are all made of epithelial MSG age sate tissue. Epithelial tissue cells are tightly packed . aioe and form a continuous sheet. They have only . es asmall amount of cementing material between ot ee, “AS, pea them and almost no intercellular spaces. f Obviously, anything entering or leaving the oe 1 body must cross at least one layer of es rs epithelium. As a result, the permeability of the eee g cells of various epithelia play an important role re en in regulating the exchange of materials ge ee ne between the body and the external in ee ene: “3 environment and also between different parts eee of the body. Regardless of the type. all Smooth musele bres epithelium is usually separated from the underlying tissue by an extracellular fibrous basement membrane. Nucleus Different epithelia (Fig. 6.9) show differing Stoath muscle fre structures that correlate with their unique - . functions. For example, in cells lining blood ee (eel vessels or lung alveoli, where transportation of substances occurs through a selectively Fig. 6.8: Location of muscle Nbres permeable surface, there is a simple flat kind Tisst 6 65 Reprint 2025-26 :