[Page 10]
TISSUES 69 69696969 branched parts (processes) called dendrites. An individual nerve cell may be up to a metre long. Many nerve fibres bound together by connective tissue make up a nerve. The signal that passes along the nerve fibre is called a nerve impulse. The nerve impulse from the nerve endings in transmitted to the dendrites of the next nerve cell. Nerve impulses allow us to move our muscles when we want to. The functional combination of nerve and muscle tissue is fundamental to most animals. This combination enables animals to move rapidly in response to stimuli. uestions 1. Name the tissue responsible for movement in our body. 2. What does a neuron look like? 3. Give three features of cardiac muscles. 4. What are the functions of areolar tissue? Q Nucleus Dendrite Axon Nerve ending Cell body Fig. 6.12: Fig. 6.12:Fig. 6.12: Fig. 6.12:Fig. 6.12: Neuron—a unit of nervous tissue then transmitting the stimulus very rapidly from one place to another within the body. The brain, spinal cord and nerves are all composed of the nervous tissue. The cells of this tissue are called nerve cells or neurons. A neuron consists of a cell body with a nucleus and cytoplasm, from which long thin hair -like parts arise (Fig. 6.12). Usually each neuron has a single long part (process) in the form of a fibre, called the axon, and many short, What you have learnt • Tissue is a group of cells similar in structure and function. • Plant tissues are of two main types – meristematic and permanent. • Meristematic tissue is the dividing tissue present in the growing regions of the plant. • Permanent tissues are derived from meristematic tissue once they lose the ability to divide. They are classified as simple and complex tissues. • Parenchyma, collenchyma and sclerenchyma are three types of simple tissues. Xylem and phloem are types of complex tissues. • Animal tissues can be epithelial, connective, muscular and nervous tissue. • Depending on shape and function, epithelial tissue is classified as squamous, cuboidal, columnar , ciliated and glandular.

[Page 11]
SCIENCE70 • The different types of connective tissues in our body include areolar tissue, adipose tissue, bone, tendon, ligament, cartilage and blood. • Striated, unstriated and cardiac are three types of muscle tissues. • Nervous tissue is made of neurons that receive and conduct impulses. Exercises 1. Define the term “tissue”. 2. How many types of elements together make up the xylem tissue? Name them. 3. How are simple tissues different from complex tissues in plants? 4. Differentiate between parenchyma, collenchyma and sclerenchyma on the basis of their cell wall. 5. What are the functions of the stomata? 6. Diagrammatically show the difference between the three types of muscle fibres. 7. What is the specific function of the cardiac muscle? 8. Differentiate between striated, unstriated and cardiac muscles on the basis of their structure and site/location in the body. 9. Draw a labelled diagram of a neuron. 10. Name the following. (a) Tissue that for ms the inner lining of our mouth. (b) Tissue that connects muscle to bone in humans. (c) Tissue that transports food in plants. (d) Tissue that stor es fat in our body. (e) Connective tissue with a fluid matrix. (f) Tissue pr esent in the brain. 11. Identify the type of tissue in the following: skin, bark of tree, bone, lining of kidney tubule, vascular bundle.

[Page 12]
TISSUES 71 12. Name the regions in which parenchyma tissue is present. 13. What is the role of epidermis in plants? 14. How does the cork act as a protective tissue? 15. Complete the following chart: