[Page 7]
SCIENCE44 fluorine to gain one electron instead of losing seven electrons. Hence, its valency is determined by subtracting seven electrons from the octet and this gives you a valency of one for fluorine. Valency can be calculated in a similar manner for oxygen. What is the valency of oxygen that you get from this calculation? Therefore, an atom of each element has a definite combining capacity, called its valency. Valency of the first eighteen elements is given in the last column of Table 4.1. uestion 1. How will you find the valency of chlorine, sulphur and magnesium? 4.5 Atomic Number and Mass Number 4.5.1 ATOMIC NUMBER We know that pr otons ar e pr esent in the nucleus of an atom. It is the number of protons of an atom, which deter mines its atomic number. It is denoted by ‘Z’. All atoms of an element have the same atomic number, Z. In fact, elements are defined by the number of protons they possess. For hydrogen, Z = 1, because in hydrogen atom, only one proton is pr esent in the nucleus. Similarly, for carbon, Z = 6. Therefore, the atomic number is defined as the total number of pr otons present in the nucleus of an atom. 4.5.2 MASS NUMBER After studying the pr operties of the sub- atomic particles of an atom, we can conclude that mass of an atom is practically due to protons and neutr ons alone. These ar e present in the nucleus of an atom. Hence pr otons and neutr ons ar e also called nucleons. Ther efore, the mass of an atom resides in its nucleus. For example, mass of carbon is 12 u because it has 6 protons and 6 neutrons, 6 u + 6 u = 12 u. Similarly, the mass of aluminium is 27 u (13 protons+14 neutrons). The mass number is defined as the sum of the total number of protons and neutrons present in the nucleus of an atom. It is denoted by ‘A’. In the notation for an atom, the atomic number, mass number and symbol of the element are to be written as: Mass Number Q Symbol of element Atomic Number For example, nitrogen is written as 14 7 N . uestions 1. If number of electrons in an atom is 8 and number of protons is also 8, then (i) what is the atomic number of the atom? and (ii) what is the charge on the atom? 2. With the help of T able 4.1, find out the mass number of oxygen and sulphur atom. 4.6 Isotopes In natur e, a number of atoms of some elements have been identified, which have the same atomic number but dif ferent mass numbers. For example, take the case of hydrogen atom, it has three atomic species, namely protium ( 1 1 H), deuterium ( 2 1 H or D) and tritium ( 3 1 H or T). The atomic number of each one is 1, but the mass number is 1, 2 and 3, respectively. Other such examples are (i) carbon, 12 6 C and 14 6 C, (ii) chlorine, 35 17 Cl and 37 17 Cl, etc. On the basis of these examples, isotopes are defined as the atoms of the same element, having the same atomic number but different mass numbers. Ther efore, we can say that there are three isotopes of hydrogen atom, namely protium, deuterium and tritium. Q X A Z Reprint 2025-26
fluorine to gain one electron instead of losing = 6 neutrons. Gu + 6 u = 12 u. Similarly, the seven electrons. Hence, its valency is determined — mass of aluminium is 27 u (13 protons+14 by subtracting seven electrons from the octet | neutrons). The mass number is defined as the and this gives you a valency of one for fluorine. — sum of the total number of protons and Valency can be calculated ina similar manner — neutrons present in the nucleus of an atom. It for oxygen. What is the valency of oxygen that — is denoted by ‘A’. In the notation for an atom, you get from this calculation’? the atomic number, mass number and symbol Therefore, an atom of each element hasa — of the element are to be written as: definite combining capacity, called its valency. T : Mass Number Valency of the first eighteen elements is given A in the last column of Table 4.1. Symbol of . | I How will vou find the valency For example, nitrogen is written as GN, of chlorine, sulphur and 7 magnesium? . Vy (A) westions |) 2. number of electrons in an atom : is Sand number of protons is alse 4.5 Atomic Number and Mass 8 then fi} what is the atoniic Number number of the atonr? and fii} what is the Charge on the atom? 2. With the help of Table 4.1, tind 4.5.1. ATOMIC: NUMBER aut the mass number of oxvecn We know that protons are present in the and sulphur aon. nucleus of an atom. It is the number of protons of an atom, which determines its 4.6 Isotopes atomic number. It is denoted by °Z’. All atoms In nature. a number of atoms of some of an element have the same atomic number, elements have been identified, which have the Z. In fact, elements are defined by the number same atomic number but different mass of protons they possess. For hydrogen. Z = 1. bers. For example, take the case of because in hydrogen atom, only one proton hed fem ¢ i it ‘he Phe - tomic a des is present in the nucleus. Similarly. for hydrogen atom. AS Maree ALONE SPECIES, carbon, Z = 6. Therefore, the atomic number — Namely protium (}11), deuterium (? 1 or D) is defined as the total number of protons : present in the nucleus of an atom. and tritium (| Hor T), The atomic number of each one is 1, but the mass number is 1, 2 4.5.2. MAss NUMBER and 3, respectively. Other such examples are After studying the properties of the sub- (i) carbon, % C and i C, (ii) chlorine, cl atomic particles of an atom, we can conclude ; that mass of an atom is practically due to and a Cl. ete. protons and neutrons alone. These are On the basis of these examples, isotopes present in the nucleus of an atom. Hence are defined as the atoms of the same element, protons and neutrons are also called — having the same atomic number but different nucleons. Therefore, the mass of an atom = mass numbers. Therefore. we can say that resides in its nucleus. For example, mass of | there are three isotopes of hydrogen atom, carbon is 12 u because it has 6 protons and — namely protium, deuterium and tritium. a4 Science. : Reprint 2025-26

[Page 8]
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM 45 Q Many elements consist of a mixture of isotopes. Each isotope of an element is a pure substance. The chemical pr operties of isotopes ar e similar but their physical properties are different. Chlorine occurs in nature in two isotopic forms, with masses 35 u and 37 u in the ratio of 3:1. Obviously, the question arises: what should we take as the mass of chlorine atom? Let us find out. The average atomic mass of chlorine atom, on the basis of above data, will be 35 75 100 37 25 100 × + ×      =      + = =105 4 3 7 4 142 4 35 5 . u The mass of an atom of any natural element is taken as the average mass of all the naturally occuring atoms of that element. If an element has no isotopes, then the mass of its atom would be the same as the sum of protons and neutrons in it. But if an element occurs in isotopic forms, then we have to know the percentage of each isotopic form and then the average mass is calculated. This does not mean that any one atom of chlorine has a fractional mass of 35.5 u. It means that if you take a certain amount of chlorine, it will contain both isotopes of chlorine and the average mass is 35.5 u. Applications Since the chemical properties of all the isotopes of an element ar e the same, normally we ar e not concer ned about taking a mixture. But some isotopes have special properties which find them useful in various fields. Some of them are : (i) An isotope of uranium is used as a fuel in nuclear reactors. (ii) An isotope of cobalt is used in the treatment of cancer. (iii) An isotope of iodine is used in the treatment of goitre. 4.6.1 ISOBARS Let us consider two elements — calcium, atomic number 20, and ar gon, atomic number 18. The number of protons in these atoms is different, but the mass number of both these elements is 40. That is, the total number of nucleons is the same in the atoms of this pair of elements. Atoms of different elements with different atomic numbers, which have the same mass number, ar e known as isobars. uestions 1. For the symbol H,D and T tabulate thr ee sub-atomic particles found in each of them. 2. Write the electronic configuration of any one pair of isotopes and isobars. What you have learnt • Credit for the discovery of electron and proton goes to J.J. Thomson and E.Goldstein, respectively. • J.J. Thomson proposed that electrons are embedded in a positive sphere. Reprint 2025-26
Many elements consist of a mixture of | Applications isotopes. Each isotope of an element is a pure Since the chemical properties of all the substance. The chemical properties of isotopes of an element are the same, isotopes are similar but their physical normally we are not concerned about properties are different. taking a mixture. But some isotopes have Chlorine occurs in nature in two isotopic special properties which find them useful forms, with masses 35 u and 37 u in the ratio in various fields. Some of them are : of 3:1. Obviously, the question arises: what (i) An isotope of uranium is used asa fuel should we take as the mass of chlorine atom’? in nuclear reactors. Let us find out. (ii) An isotope of cobalt is used in the The average atomic mass of chlorine atom, treatment of cancer. on the basis of above data, will be (ili) An isotope of iodine is used in the treatment of goitre. Ss 95 [ss x 7 4 a7 x * | 100 100 4.6.1 IsoBars Let us consider two elements — calcium, _ {105 + 37) _ 142 _ 35.5u atomic number 20, and argon, atomic { 4 4 ) 4 ~~ number 18. The number of protons in these atoms is different, but the mass number of The mass of an atom of any natural element both these elements is 40. That is, the total ste ne caesar once afte coy = number of nucleons is the same in the atoms is taken as the average mass of all the naturally . : , hang « sat ttre 7 of this pair of elements. Atoms of different occuring atoms of that element. Ifan element . oe 7 oe elements with different atomic numbers, which has no isotopes, then the mass of its atom have the same mass number, are known as would be the same as the sum of protons and isobars neutrons in it. But if an element oceurs in ~~ isotopic forms, then we have to know the sims percentage of each isotopic form and then the fy) WeStots average mass is calculated. 1 } 1 For the svmbal H,D and T This does not mean that any one atom of tabulate three sub-atomic chlorine has a fractional mass of 35.5 u. It pardcles found in cach of them. means that if you take a certain amount of | 2 Write the electronic chlorine, it will contain both isotopes of UJ configuration of any one pair of chlorine and the average mass is 35.5 u. isotopes and isobars. [Ss What @ fx, you have hyp Ee aie earnt ° Credit for the discovery of electron and proton goes to J.J. Thomson and E.Goldstein, respectively. ° J.J. Thomson proposed that electrons are embedded in a positive sphere. Sirgen xe Ob THE ATOM AS Reprint 2025-26