[Page 3]
SCIENCE40 Fig. 4.2: Scattering of α-particles by a gold foil But, the α-particle scattering experiment gave totally unexpected results (Fig. 4.2). The following observations were made: (i) Most of the fast moving α-particles passed straight through the gold foil. (ii) Some of the α-particles were deflected by the foil by small angles. (iii) Surprisingly one out of every 12000 particles appeared to rebound. In the wor ds of Ruther ford, “This result was almost as incr edible as if you fir e a 15-inch shell at a piece of tissue paper and it comes back and hits you”. He will hear a sound when each stone strikes the wall. If he repeats this ten times, he will hear the sound ten times. But if a blind-folded child were to throw stones at a barbed-wire fence, most of the stones would not hit the fencing and no sound would be heard. This is because there are lots of gaps in the fence which allow the stone to pass through them. Following a similar reasoning, Rutherford concluded fr om the α-particle scattering experiment that— (i) Most of the space inside the atom is empty because most of the α-particles passed through the gold foil without getting deflected. (ii) V ery few particles were deflected from their path, indicating that the positive charge of the atom occupies very little space. (iii) A very small fraction of α-particles were deflected by 1800, indicating that all the positive charge and mass of the gold atom were concentrated in a very small volume within the atom. From the data he also calculated that the radius of the nucleus is about 105 times less than the radius of the atom. On the basis of his experiment, Rutherford put forward the nuclear model of an atom, which had the following features: (i) There is a positively charged centre in an atom called the nucleus. Nearly all the mass of an atom r esides in the nucleus. (ii) The electr ons r evolve ar ound the nucleus in circular paths. (iii) The size of the nucleus is very small as compared to the size of the atom. Drawbacks of Rutherford’s model of the atom The revolution of the electron in a circular orbit is not expected to be stable. Any particle in a circular orbit would undergo acceleration. During acceleration, charged particles would radiate energy. Thus, the revolving electron would lose energy and finally fall into the nucleus. If this were so, the atom should be highly unstable and hence matter would not exist in the form that we know. We know that atoms are quite stable. E. Rutherford (1871–1937) was born at Spring Gr ove on 30 August 1871. He was known as the ‘Father’ of nuclear physics. He is famous for his work on radioactivity and the discovery of the nucleus of an atom with the gold foil experiment. He got the Nobel prize in chemistry in 1908. Let us think of an activity in an open field to understand the implications of this experiment. Let a child stand in fr ont of a wall with his eyes closed. Let him thr ow stones at the wall from a distance. Reprint 2025-26
Gold atoms He will hear a sound when each stone strikes the wall. If he repeats this ten times, he will sparc (estore hear the soundten times. Br u ita Diind folded ft. bet BS ¢ were to throw stones at a barbed-wire — $5 fence. most of the stones would not hit the (+ >< p<) fencing and no sound would be heard. This is OP 2 ° PP because there are lots of gaps in the fence enone, which allow the stone to pass through them. iW=-o-o0 Following a similar reasoning, Rutherford concluded from the a-particle scattering a7 a= experiment that— DOA, (i) Most of the space inside the atom is oe PR) empty because most of the a-particles ~{- b= passed through the gold foil without getting deflected. ———Se (ii) Very few particles were deflected from their path, indicating that the positive charge of the atom occupies very little Pig. 4.2: Scattering ofa-particles by a gold foil space. (iii) A very small fraction of a-particles But, the a-particle scattering experiment were deflected by 180°. indicating that gave totally unexpected results (Fig. 4.2), The all the positive charge and mass of the following observations were made: gold atom were concentrated ina very {i) Most of the fast moving a-particles small volume within the atom. . passed straight through the gold foil. From the data he also calculated that the (i), Some of the a-particles were deflected radius of the nucleus is about 10% times less by the foil by small angles. than the radius of the atom. {iii) Surprisingly one out of every 12000 On the basis of his experiment, particles appeared to rebound. Rutherford put forward the nuclear model of In the words of Rutherford, “This result an atom, which had the following features: was almost as incredible as if you fire a (i) There is a positively charged centre in 15-inch shell at a piece of tissue paper and it an atom called the nucleus. Nearly all comes back and hits you". the mass of an atom resides in the nucleus. ~ E. Rutherford (1871-1937) (ii) The electrons revolve around the ; was born at Spring Grove nucleus in eireular paths. : on 30 August 1871. He was (iii) The size of the nucleus is very small \ ~ known as the ‘Father’ of as compared to the size of the atom. v nuclear physics. He is Drawhacks of Rutherford’s model of famous for his work on the atom radioactivity and the . discovery of the nucleus of an atom with The revolution of the electron in a circular orbit the gold foil experiment. He got the Nobel is not expected to be stable. Any particle in a prize in chemistry in 1908. circular orbit would undergo acceleration. During acceleration, charged particles would — PAO energy. Thus, the revolving electron Let us think of an activity in an open field would lose energy and finally fall into the to understand the implications of this nucleus. If this were so, the atom should be experiment. Let a child stand in front of a highly unstable and hence matter would not wall with his eyes closed. Let him throw — exist in the form that we know. We know that stones at the wall from a distance. — atomsare quite stable. 40 Science. : Reprint 2025-26

[Page 4]
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM 41 4.2.3 BOHR’S MODEL OF ATOM In order to overcome the objections raised against Ruther ford’s model of the atom, Neils Bohr put forwar d the following postulates about the model of an atom: (i) Only certain special orbits known as discrete orbits of electrons, are allowed inside the atom. (ii) While revolving in discr ete orbits the electrons do not radiate energy. uestions 1. On the basis of Thomson’s model of an atom, explain how the atom is neutral as a whole. 2. On the basis of Ruther ford’s model of an atom, which sub- atomic particle is present in the nucleus of an atom? 3. Draw a sketch of Bohr’s model of an atom with three shells. 4. What do you think would be the observation if the α-particle scattering experiment is carried out using a foil of a metal other than gold? 4.2.4 NEUTRONS In 1932, J. Chadwick discovered another sub- atomic particle which had no char ge and a mass nearly equal to that of a proton. It was eventually named as neutron. Neutrons are present in the nucleus of all atoms, except hydr ogen. In general, a neutr on is represented as ‘n’. The mass of an atom is therefore given by the sum of the masses of protons and neutrons present in the nucleus. uestions 1. Name the thr ee sub-atomic particles of an atom. 2. Helium atom has an atomic mass of 4 u and two pr otons in its nucleus. How many neutr ons does it have? 4.3 How are Electrons Distributed in Different Orbits (Shells)? The distribution of electr ons into dif ferent orbits of an atom was suggested by Bohr and Bury. The following rules are followed for writing the number of electr ons in dif ferent energy levels or shells: (i) The maximum number of electr ons present in a shell is given by the Neils Bohr (1885–1962) was bor n in Copenhagen on 7 October 1885. He was appointed pr ofessor of physics at Copenhagen University in 1916. He got the Nobel prize for his work on the structure of atom in 1922. Among Pr ofessor Bohr’s numerous writings, three appearing as books are: (i) The Theory of Spectra and Atomic Constitution, (ii) Atomic Theory and, (iii) The Description of Nature. These orbits or shells are called energy levels. Energy levels in an atom are shown in Fig. 4.3. Q Fig. 4.3: A few energy levels in an atom These orbits or shells are represented by the letters K,L,M,N,… or the numbers, n=1,2,3,4,…. Q Reprint 2025-26
4.2.3 BOHR’S MODEL OF ATOM (" uestions In order to overcome the objections raised \ 1. On the basis of Thomson's model against Rutherford’s model of the atom, ofanatom, cxplain how the atonr Neils Bohr put forward the following is neutral asa whale. postulates about the model of an atom: | 2 On the basis of Ruthertord’s {i) Only certain special orbits known as UJ model of an atom, which sub- discrete orbits of electrons, are allowed atomic particle is present in the inside the atom. nueleus ofan atonr? (ii) While revolving in discrete orbits the 3. Draw a sketeh of Bohr’s model electrons do not radiate energy. ofan atom with dirce shells. 4. Whatdo vou dink would be the observation if the u-particle Neils Bohr (1885-1962) sCaHCHINE CNpCrinene is carricd . was born in Copenhagen out using a tofl of a metal other on 7 October 1885. He was than gold? . appointed professor of physics at Copenhagen 4.2.4 NEUTRONS Jniversity in 1916. He got < U sly 9 8 - Be In 1932, J. Chadwick discovered another sub- the Nobel prize for his work 7 - atomic particle which had no charge and a on the structure of atom in . oe a mass nearly equal to that of a proton. It was 1922. Among Professor . - . . . " eventually named as neutron, Neutrons are Bohr’s numerous writings. three appearing wees . alle . a a present in the nucleus of all atoms, except as books are: . o P 5 i) The Tt { Spectra and Atomic hydrogen. In general. a neutron is (i ne neory © aon ee . ond represented as ‘n’. The mass of an atom is haae eo (tt) in . ieory and. therefore given by the sum of the masses of (iti) The Description of Nature. protons and neutrons present in the nucleus. These orbits or shells are called energy uestions levels. Energy levels in an atom are shown in 1 Name the three sub-atomic Fig. 4.3. | particles of an aton.. 2. Helium atom has an atomic mass S shell an-4) | of fou and avo protons in its M shell (ne2} | nucleus, How many neutrons : YY docs it have? L shell (n=) K shell (n=1) Nucleres 43 Howare Electrons Distributed in Different Orbits (Shells)? The distribution of electrons into different orbits of an atom was suggested by Bohr and Bury. Fig. 4.3: A few energy levels in an aiom The following rules are followed for writing the number of electrons in different energy These orbits or shells are represented by __ levels or shells: the letters K,L,M.N,... or the numbers. (i) The maximum number of electrons n=1,2,3.4,.... present in a shell is given by the Sueccn re oF tHE Ares 4l Reprint 2025-26