[Page 5]
SCIENCE42 formula 2n 2, where ‘n’ is the orbit number or energy level index, 1,2,3,…. Hence the maximum number of electrons in different shells are as follows: first orbit or K-shell will be = 2 × 12 = 2, second orbit or L-shell will be = 2 × 22 = 8, third orbit or M-shell will be = 2 × 32 = 18, fourth orbit or N-shell will be = 2 × 42 = 32, and so on. (ii) The maximum number of electrons that can be accommodated in the outermost orbit is 8. (iii) Electrons are not accommodated in a given shell, unless the inner shells are filled. That is, the shells are filled in a step-wise manner. Atomic structure of the first eighteen elements is shown schematically in Fig. 4.4. • The composition of atoms of the first eighteen elements is given in Table 4.1. uestions 1. Write the distribution of electrons in carbon and sodium atoms. 2. If K and L shells of an atom are full, then what would be the total number of electrons in the atom? 4.4 Valency We have learnt how the electrons in an atom are arranged in different shells/orbits. The electrons present in the outer most shell of an atom are known as the valence electrons. From the Bohr-Bury scheme, we also know that the outermost shell of an atom can Activity 4.2 • Make a static atomic model displaying electronic configuration of the first eighteen elements. Fig.4.4: Schematic atomic structure of the first eighteen elements Q accommodate a maximum of 8 electrons. It was observed that the atoms of elements, completely filled with 8 electrons in the outermost shell show little chemical activity. In other words, their combining capacity or valency is zero. Of these inert elements, the

[Page 6]
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM 43 Table 4.1: Composition of Atoms of the First Eighteen Elements with Electron Distribution in Various Shells helium atom has two electrons in its outermost shell and all other elements have atoms with eight electrons in the outermost shell. The combining capacity of the atoms of elements, that is, their tendency to react and form molecules with atoms of the same or different elements, was thus explained as an attempt to attain a fully-filled outermost shell. An outermost-shell, which had eight electrons was said to possess an octet. Atoms would thus react, so as to achieve an octet in the outermost shell. This was done by sharing, gaining or losing electrons. The number of electrons gained, lost or shared so as to make the octet of electrons in the outermost shell, gives us directly the combining capacity of the element, that is, the valency discussed in the previous chapter . For example, hydr ogen/ lithium/sodium atoms contain one electron each in their outermost shell, therefore each one of them can lose one electron. So, they are said to have valency of one. Can you tell, what is valency of magnesium and aluminium? It is two and three, respectively, because magnesium has two electrons in its outermost shell and aluminium has thr ee electrons in its outermost shell. If the number of electr ons in the outermost shell of an atom is close to its full capacity, then valency is deter mined in a different way. For example, the fluorine atom has 7 electrons in the outermost shell, and its valency could be 7. But it is easier for Name of Symbol Atomic Number Number Number Vale- Element Number of of of ncy Protons Neutrons Electrons K L M N Hydrogen H 1 1 - 1 1 - - - 1 Helium He 2 2 2 2 2 - - - 0 Lithium Li 3 3 4 3 2 1 - - 1 Beryllium Be 4 4 5 4 2 2 - - 2 Boron B 5 5 6 5 2 3 - - 3 Carbon C 6 6 6 6 2 4 - - 4 Nitrogen N 7 7 7 7 2 5 - - 3 Oxygen O 8 8 8 8 2 6 - - 2 Fluorine F 9 9 10 9 2 7 - - 1 Neon Ne 10 10 10 10 2 8 - - 0 Sodium Na 11 11 12 11 2 8 1 - 1 Magnesium Mg 12 12 12 12 2 8 2 - 2 Aluminium Al 13 13 14 13 2 8 3 - 3 Silicon Si 14 14 14 14 2 8 4 - 4 Phosphorus P 15 15 16 15 2 8 5 - 3,5 Sulphur S 16 16 16 16 2 8 6 - 2 Chlorine Cl 17 17 18 17 2 8 7 - 1 Argon Ar 18 18 22 18 2 8 8 0 Distribution of Electrons

[Page 7]
SCIENCE44 fluorine to gain one electron instead of losing seven electrons. Hence, its valency is determined by subtracting seven electrons from the octet and this gives you a valency of one for fluorine. Valency can be calculated in a similar manner for oxygen. What is the valency of oxygen that you get from this calculation? Therefore, an atom of each element has a definite combining capacity, called its valency. Valency of the first eighteen elements is given in the last column of Table 4.1. uestion 1. How will you find the valency of chlorine, sulphur and magnesium? 4.5 Atomic Number and Mass Number 4.5.1 ATOMIC NUMBER We know that pr otons ar e pr esent in the nucleus of an atom. It is the number of protons of an atom, which deter mines its atomic number. It is denoted by ‘Z’. All atoms of an element have the same atomic number, Z. In fact, elements are defined by the number of protons they possess. For hydrogen, Z = 1, because in hydrogen atom, only one proton is pr esent in the nucleus. Similarly, for carbon, Z = 6. Therefore, the atomic number is defined as the total number of pr otons present in the nucleus of an atom. 4.5.2 MASS NUMBER After studying the properties of the sub- atomic particles of an atom, we can conclude that mass of an atom is practically due to protons and neutr ons alone. These ar e present in the nucleus of an atom. Hence pr otons and neutr ons ar e also called nucleons. Ther efore, the mass of an atom resides in its nucleus. For example, mass of carbon is 12 u because it has 6 protons and 6 neutrons, 6 u + 6 u = 12 u. Similarly, the mass of aluminium is 27 u (13 protons+14 neutrons). The mass number is defined as the sum of the total number of protons and neutrons present in the nucleus of an atom. It is denoted by ‘A’. In the notation for an atom, the atomic number, mass number and symbol of the element are to be written as: Mass Number Q Symbol of element Atomic Number For example, nitrogen is written as 14 7 N . uestions 1. If number of electrons in an atom is 8 and number of protons is also 8, then (i) what is the atomic number of the atom? and (ii) what is the charge on the atom? 2. With the help of T able 4.1, find out the mass number of oxygen and sulphur atom. 4.6 Isotopes In nature, a number of atoms of some elements have been identified, which have the same atomic number but different mass numbers. For example, take the case of hydrogen atom, it has three atomic species, namely protium ( 1 1 H), deuterium ( 2 1 H or D) and tritium ( 3 1 H or T). The atomic number of each one is 1, but the mass number is 1, 2 and 3, respectively. Other such examples are (i) carbon, 12 6 C and 14 6 C, (ii) chlorine, 35 17 Cl and 37 17 Cl, etc. On the basis of these examples, isotopes are defined as the atoms of the same element, having the same atomic number but different mass numbers. Ther efore, we can say that there are three isotopes of hydrogen atom, namely protium, deuterium and tritium. Q X A Z

[Page 8]
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM 45 Q Many elements consist of a mixture of isotopes. Each isotope of an element is a pure substance. The chemical properties of isotopes ar e similar but their physical properties are different. Chlorine occurs in nature in two isotopic forms, with masses 35 u and 37 u in the ratio of 3:1. Obviously, the question arises: what should we take as the mass of chlorine atom? Let us find out. The average atomic mass of chlorine atom, on the basis of above data, will be 35 75 100 37 25 100 × + ×      =      + = =105 4 3 7 4 142 4 35 5 . u The mass of an atom of any natural element is taken as the average mass of all the naturally occuring atoms of that element. If an element has no isotopes, then the mass of its atom would be the same as the sum of protons and neutrons in it. But if an element occurs in isotopic forms, then we have to know the percentage of each isotopic form and then the average mass is calculated. This does not mean that any one atom of chlorine has a fractional mass of 35.5 u. It means that if you take a certain amount of chlorine, it will contain both isotopes of chlorine and the average mass is 35.5 u. Applications Since the chemical properties of all the isotopes of an element ar e the same, normally we ar e not concer ned about taking a mixture. But some isotopes have special properties which find them useful in various fields. Some of them are : (i) An isotope of uranium is used as a fuel in nuclear reactors. (ii) An isotope of cobalt is used in the treatment of cancer. (iii) An isotope of iodine is used in the treatment of goitre. 4.6.1 ISOBARS Let us consider two elements — calcium, atomic number 20, and ar gon, atomic number 18. The number of protons in these atoms is different, but the mass number of both these elements is 40. That is, the total number of nucleons is the same in the atoms of this pair of elements. Atoms of different elements with different atomic numbers, which have the same mass number, ar e known as isobars. uestions 1. For the symbol H,D and T tabulate thr ee sub-atomic particles found in each of them. 2. Write the electronic configuration of any one pair of isotopes and isobars. What you have learnt • Credit for the discovery of electron and proton goes to J.J. Thomson and E.Goldstein, respectively. • J.J. Thomson proposed that electrons are embedded in a positive sphere.

[Page 9]
SCIENCE46 • Rutherford’s alpha-particle scattering experiment led to the discovery of the atomic nucleus. • Rutherford’s model of the atom pr oposed that a very tiny nucleus is present inside the atom and electrons revolve around this nucleus. The stability of the atom could not be explained by this model. • Neils Bohr’s model of the atom was mor e successful. He proposed that electrons are distributed in different shells with discrete energy around the nucleus. If the atomic shells ar e complete, then the atom will be stable and less reactive. • J. Chadwick discovered presence of neutrons in the nucleus of an atom. So, the thr ee sub-atomic particles of an atom are: (i) electr ons, (ii) pr otons and (iii) neutr ons. Electr ons ar e negatively charged, protons are positively charged and neutrons have no charges. The mass of an electron is about 1 2000 times the mass of an hydr ogen atom. The mass of a pr oton and a neutron is taken as one unit each. • Shells of an atom are designated as K,L,M,N,…. • Valency is the combining capacity of an atom. • The atomic number of an element is the same as the number of protons in the nucleus of its atom. • The mass number of an atom is equal to the number of nucleons in its nucleus. • Isotopes are atoms of the same element, which have different mass numbers. • Isobars are atoms having the same mass number but different atomic numbers. • Elements are defined by the number of protons they possess. Exercises 1. Compare the properties of electrons, protons and neutrons. 2. What are the limitations of J.J. Thomson’s model of the atom? 3. What are the limitations of Rutherford’s model of the atom? 4. Describe Bohr’s model of the atom. 5. Compare all the pr oposed models of an atom given in this chapter. 6. Summarise the rules for writing of distribution of electrons in various shells for the first eighteen elements. 7. Define valency by taking examples of silicon and oxygen.