[Page 1]
In Chapter 3, we have learnt that atoms and molecules ar e the fundamental building blocks of matter . The existence of dif ferent kinds of matter is due to dif ferent atoms constituting them. Now the questions arise: (i) What makes the atom of one element differ ent from the atom of another element? and (ii) Ar e atoms r eally indivisible, as proposed by Dalton, or ar e ther e smaller constituents inside the atom? W e shall find out the answers to these questions in this chapter . W e will lear n about sub-atomic particles and the various models that have been proposed to explain how these particles are arranged within the atom. A major challenge before the scientists at the end of the 19th century was to reveal the structure of the atom as well as to explain its important properties. The elucidation of the structure of atoms is based on a series of experiments. One of the first indications that atoms are not indivisible, comes fr om studying static electricity and the condition under which electricity is conducted by dif ferent substances. 4.1 Charged Particles in Matter For understanding the natur e of char ged particles in matter , let us carry out the following activities: Activity ______________ 4.1 A. Comb dry hair . Does the comb then attract small pieces of paper? B. Rub a glass r od with a silk cloth and bring the rod near an inflated balloon. Observe what happens. From these activities, can we conclude that on rubbing two objects together , they become electrically charged? Where does this charge come fr om? This question can be answered by knowing that an atom is divisible and consists of charged particles. Many scientists contributed in r evealing the presence of charged particles in an atom. It was known by 1900 that the atom was indivisible particle but contained at least one sub-atomic particle – the electron identified by J.J. Thomson. Even before the electron was identified, E. Goldstein in 1886 discovered the presence of new radiations in a gas discharge and called them canal rays. These rays were positively charged radiations which ultimately led to the discovery of another sub-atomic particle. This sub-atomic particle had a charge, equal in magnitude but opposite in sign to that of the electron. Its mass was approximately 2000 times as that of the electron. It was given the name of proton. In general, an electron is represented as ‘e –’ and a proton as ‘p +’. The mass of a proton is taken as one unit and its charge as plus one. The mass of an electron is considered to be negligible and its charge is minus one. It seemed that an atom was composed of protons and electrons, mutually balancing their charges. It also appeared that the protons were in the interior of the atom, for whereas electrons could easily be removed off but not protons. Now the big question was: what sort of structure did these particles of the atom for m? We will find the answer to this question below. 4 S SS SSTRUCTURETRUCTURETRUCTURETRUCTURETRUCTURE OF OFOF OFOF THE THETHE THETHE A A A A ATOM TOMTOM TOMTOM C hapter Reprint 2025-26
C ha pter4 ae acces In Chapter 3, we have learnt that atoms and From these activities, can we conclude molecules are the fundamental building — that on rubbing two objects together, they blocks of matter. The existence of different become electrically charged? Where does this kinds of matter is due to different atoms charge come from? This question can be fe Whew ae mem Now the anestions arise: answered by knowing that an atom is divisible () What makes the atom of one eleme nt and consists of charged particles. different from the atom of another element? Many scientists contributed in revealing and (ii) Are atoms really indivisible. as ' . any 8 ot he eal n oie n revealing proposed by Dalton, or are there smaller the presence of charged particles in an atom. constituents inside the atom’? We shall find It was known by 1900 that the atom was out the answers to these questions in this — indivisible particle but contained at least one chapter. We will learn about sub-atomic — Stib-atomic particle - the electron identified by particles and the various models that have — J.J. Thomson. Even before the electron was been proposed to explain how these particles identified, E. Goldstein in 1886 discovered the are arranged within the atom. presence of new radiations ina gas discharge A major challenge before the scientists at and called them canal rays. These rays were the end of the 19th century was to reveal the positively charged radiations which ultimately Siructare ot the anil as wera te explain is led to the discovery of another sub-atomic Mportanl properties. the eucicallon ohne particle. This sub-atomic particle had a charge, structure of atoms is based on a series of ° 4 . equal in magnitude but opposite in sign to that experiments. , One of the first indications that atoms are 0f the electron. Its mass was approximately not indivisible, comes from studying static 2000 times as that of the electron. It was given electricity and the condition under which — the name of proton. In general, an electron is electricity is conducted by different represented as ‘e” and a proton as ‘p’. The substances. mass ofa proton is taken as one unit and its charge as plus one. The mass of an electron is 4.1 Charged Particles in Matter considered to be negligible and its charge is . minus one, For understanding the nature of charged It seemed that an atom was composed of particles in matter, let us carry out the . . a protons and electrons, mutually balancing following activities: i ° their charges. It also appeared that the protons Activity 4.1 were in the interior of the atom, for whereas electrons could easily be removed off but A. Comb dry hair. Does the comb then . . . . . : oe not protons. Now the big question was: attract small pieces of paper? : B. Rub a glass rod with a silk cloth and what sort of structure did these particles of bring the rod near an inflated balloon. the atom form? We will find the answer to Observe what happens. this question below. Reprint 2025-26

[Page 2]
uestions 1. What are canal rays? 2. If an atom contains one electron and one proton, will it carry any charge or not? 4.2 The Structure of an Atom We have lear nt Dalton’s atomic theory in Chapter 3, which suggested that the atom was indivisible and indestructible. But the discovery of two fundamental particles (electrons and protons) inside the atom, led to the failure of this aspect of Dalton’s atomic theory. It was then consider ed necessary to know how electrons and protons are arranged within an atom. For explaining this, many scientists proposed various atomic models. J.J. Thomson was the first one to propose a model for the structure of an atom. 4.2.1 THOMSON’S MODEL OF AN ATOM Thomson proposed the model of an atom to be similar to that of a Christmas pudding. The electrons, in a sphere of positive charge, were like currants (dry fruits) in a spherical Christmas pudding. We can also think of a watermelon, the positive charge in the atom is spread all over like the r ed edible part of the water melon, while the electr ons ar e studded in the positively charged sphere, like the seeds in the watermelon (Fig. 4.1). Thomson proposed that: (i) An atom consists of a positively charged sphere and the electrons are embedded in it. (ii) The negative and positive charges are equal in magnitude. So, the atom as a whole is electrically neutral. Although Thomson’s model explained that atoms are electrically neutral, the results of experiments carried out by other scientists could not be explained by this model, as we will see below. 4.2.2 RUTHERFORD’S MODEL OF AN ATOM Ernest Rutherford was interested in knowing how the electr ons ar e arranged within an atom. Rutherford designed an experiment for this. In this experiment, fast moving alpha (α)-particles wer e made to fall on a thin gold foil. • He selected a gold foil because he wanted as thin a layer as possible. This gold foil was about 1000 atoms thick. • α-particles ar e doubly-char ged helium ions. Since they have a mass of 4 u, the fast-moving α-particles have a considerable amount of energy. • It was expected that α-particles would be deflected by the sub-atomic particles in the gold atoms. Since the α-particles were much heavier than the pr otons, he did not expect to see large deflections. Q Fig.4.1: Thomson’s model of an atom J.J. Thomson (1856– 1940), a British physicist, was born in Cheetham Hill, a suburb of Manchester , on 18 December 1856. He was awarded the Nobel prize in Physics in 1906 for his work on the discovery of electrons. He directed the Cavendish Laboratory at Cambridge for 35 years and seven of his research assistants subsequently won Nobel prizes. STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM 39 Reprint 2025-26
(1 westions J.J. Thomson (1856- ; 1 What are canal ravs? 1940), a British fag * a 2. Han atom contains onc clectvon physicist, was born in 4 sal and one proton. Will iCcarty any Cheetham Hill, a suburb [isa - \ (| charge or not? of Manchester, on bs . i, 18 December 1856. He | was awarded the Nobel « prize in Physics in 1906 ig for his work on the ere 4.2 The Structure of an Atom discovery of electrons, He directed the Cavendish Laboratory at We have learnt Dalton’s atomic theory in Cambridge for 35 years and seven of his Chapter 3. which suggested that the atom research assistants subsequently won was indivisible and indestructible. But the Nobel prizes. . discovery of two fundamental particles (electrons and protons) inside the atom, led |= Thomson proposed that: to the failure of this aspect of Dalton’s atomic (i) An atom consists of a positively theory. It was then considered necessary to charged sphere and the electrons are know how electrons and protons are arranged embedded in it. within an atom. For explaining this, many (ii) The negative and positive charges are scientists proposed various atomic models. equal in magnitude. So, the atomasa J.J. Thomson was the first one to propose a whole is electrically neutral. model for the structure of an atom. Although Thomson's model explained that oe . . . atoms are electrically neutral, the results of 4.2.1 THOMSON’S MODEL OF AN ATOM experiments carried out by other scientists Thomson proposed the model of an atom to could not be explained by this model, as we be similar to that of a Christmas pudding, Will see below. The electrons, in a sphere of positive charge, were like currants (dry fruits) ina spherical 4.2.2 RUTHERFORD’S MODEL OF AN ATOM Christmas pudding, We can also think ofa Ernest Rutherford was interested in knowing watermelon, the positive charge in the atom ° is spread all over like the red edible part of how the electrons are arranged within an the watermelon. while the electrons are 4tom. Rutherford designed an experiment for studded in the positively charged sphere, like this. In this experiment, fast moving alpha the seeds in the watermelon (Fig. 4.1). (a}-particles were made to fall on a thin gold foil. _. « Heselected a gold foil because he wanted Jo 9 as thin a layer as possible. This gold foil © } positive sphere was about 1000 atoms thick. / } , * «-particles are doubly-charged helium i \ ions. Since they have a mass of 4 u. the 1 o ° | fast-moving a-particles have a © / considerable amount of energy. ° oy Electron e = It was expected that a-particles would be —_° _ deflected by the sub-atomic particles in — the gold atoms. Since the u-particles were much heavier than the protons, he did Fig.4.12 Thoinson’s model ofan atoi not expect to see large deflections. Serco xe oF tHe Arost 39 Reprint 2025-26 :