[Page 9]
SCIENCE46 • Rutherford’s alpha-particle scattering experiment led to the discovery of the atomic nucleus. • Rutherford’s model of the atom pr oposed that a very tiny nucleus is present inside the atom and electrons revolve around this nucleus. The stability of the atom could not be explained by this model. • Neils Bohr’s model of the atom was mor e successful. He proposed that electrons are distributed in different shells with discrete energy around the nucleus. If the atomic shells ar e complete, then the atom will be stable and less reactive. • J. Chadwick discovered presence of neutrons in the nucleus of an atom. So, the thr ee sub-atomic particles of an atom are: (i) electr ons, (ii) pr otons and (iii) neutr ons. Electr ons ar e negatively charged, protons are positively charged and neutrons have no charges. The mass of an electron is about 1 2000 times the mass of an hydr ogen atom. The mass of a pr oton and a neutron is taken as one unit each. • Shells of an atom are designated as K,L,M,N,…. • Valency is the combining capacity of an atom. • The atomic number of an element is the same as the number of protons in the nucleus of its atom. • The mass number of an atom is equal to the number of nucleons in its nucleus. • Isotopes are atoms of the same element, which have different mass numbers. • Isobars are atoms having the same mass number but different atomic numbers. • Elements are defined by the number of protons they possess. Exercises 1. Compare the properties of electrons, protons and neutrons. 2. What are the limitations of J.J. Thomson’s model of the atom? 3. What are the limitations of Rutherford’s model of the atom? 4. Describe Bohr’s model of the atom. 5. Compare all the pr oposed models of an atom given in this chapter. 6. Summarise the rules for writing of distribution of electrons in various shells for the first eighteen elements. 7. Define valency by taking examples of silicon and oxygen. Reprint 2025-26
° Rutherford’s alpha-particle scattering experiment led to the discovery of the atomic nucleus. ° Rutherford’s model of the atom proposed that a very tiny nucleus is present inside the atom and electrons revolve around this nucleus. The stability of the atom could not be explained by this model. ° Neils Bohr’s model of the atom was more successful. He proposed that electrons are distributed in different shells with discrete energy around the nucleus. If the atomic shells are complete, then the atom will be stable and less reactive. ° J. Chadwick discovered presence of neutrons in the nucleus of an atom. So, the three sub-atomic particles of an atom are: (i) electrons, (ii) protons and (iii) neutrons. Electrons are negatively charged, protons are positively charged and neutrons have no charges. The mass of an electron is about S00 times the mass of an hydrogen atom. The mass of a proton and a neutron is taken as one unit each. 3 Shells of an atom are designated as K,L,M.N..... ° Valency is the combining capacity of an atom. ° The atomic number of an element is the same as the number of protons in the nucleus of its atom. ° The mass number of an atom is equal to the number of nucleons in its nucleus. ° Isotopes are atoms of the same element, which have different mass numbers. ° Isobars are atoms having the same mass number but clifferent atomic numbers. ° Elements are defined by the number of protons they possess. . [sé Exercises om 2 1. Compare the properties of electrons, protons and neutrons. { ; a 2. What are the limitations of J.J. Thomson's model of the atom’? - 3. What are the limitations of Rutherford’s model of the atom? =) 4. Describe Bohr’s model of the atom. 5. Compare all the proposed models of an atom given in this chapter. 6. Summarise the rules for writing of distribution of electrons in various shells for the first eighteen elements. 7. Define valency by taking examples of silicon and oxygen. A6 Science. : Reprint 2025-26

[Page 10]
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM 47 8. Explain with examples (i) Atomic number , (ii) Mass number , (iii) Isotopes and iv) Isobars. Give any two uses of isotopes. 9. Na+ has completely filled K and L shells. Explain. 10. If bromine atom is available in the form of, say, two isotopes 79 35 Br (49.7%) and 81 35 Br (50.3%), calculate the average atomic mass of bromine atom. 11. The average atomic mass of a sample of an element X is 16.2 u. What are the per centages of isotopes 16 8 X and 18 8 X in the sample? 12. If Z = 3, what would be the valency of the element? Also, name the element. 13. Composition of the nuclei of two atomic species X and Y ar e given as under X Y Protons = 6 6 Neutrons = 6 8 Give the mass numbers of X and Y. What is the relation between the two species? 14. For the following statements, write T for True and F for False. (a) J.J. Thomson pr oposed that the nucleus of an atom contains only nucleons. (b) A neutr on is for med by an electr on and a pr oton combining together. Therefore, it is neutral. (c) The mass of an electron is about 1 2000 times that of proton. (d) An isotope of iodine is used for making tinctur e iodine, which is used as a medicine. Put tick (ü ) against correct choice and cross (×) against wrong choice in questions 15, 16 and 17 15. Ruther for d’s alpha-particle scattering experiment was responsible for the discovery of (a) Atomic Nucleus (b) Electron (c) Proton (d) Neutron 16. Isotopes of an element have (a) the same physical properties (b) different chemical properties (c) dif ferent number of neutrons (d) different atomic numbers. 17. Number of valence electrons in Cl– ion are: (a) 16 (b) 8 (c) 17 (d) 18 Reprint 2025-26
8. Explain with examples (i) Atomic number, (ii) Mass number, (iii) Isotopes and iv) Isobars. Give any two uses of isotopes. 9. Na* has completely filled K and L shells. Explain. 10. If bromine atom is available in the form of. say, two isotopes Br (49.7%) and 5) Br (50.3%). calculate the average atomic mass of bromine atom. 11. The average atomic mass of a sample of an clement X is 16.2 u. What are the percentages of isotopes ‘SX and ‘2X in the sample? 12. IfZ=3, what would be the valency of the element? Also, name the clement. 13. Composition of the nuclei of two atomic species X and Y are given as under x Y Protons = 6 6 Neutrons = 6 8 Give the mass numbers of X and Y. What is the relation between the two species? 14. For the following statements, write T for True and F for False. (a) J.J. Thomson proposed that the nucleus of an atom contains only nucleons. (b) A neutron is formed by an electron and a proton combining together. Therefore, it is neutral. (ec) The mass ofan electron is about sooo times that of proton. (d) An isotope of iodine is used for making tincture iodine, which is used as a medicine. Put tick (“) against correct choice and cross (x) against wrong choice in questions 15, 16 and 17 15. Rutherford’s alpha-particle scattering experiment was responsible for the discovery of (a) Atomic Nucleus (b) Electron (ce) Proton (d) Neutron 16. Isotopes of an clement have (a) the same physical properties (b) different chemical properties (ce) different number of neutrons (dq) different atomic numbers. 17. Number of valence electrons in Cl ion are: (a) 16 (b) 8 (c) 17 (d) 18 Sueccn re oF tHE Ares 47 Reprint 2025-26 :

[Page 11]
SCIENCE48 18. Which one of the following is a correct electronic configuration of sodium? (a) 2,8 (b) 8,2,1 (c) 2,1,8 (d) 2,8,1. 19. Complete the following table. Atomic Mass Number Number Number Name of Number Number of of of the Atomic Neutrons Protons Electrons Species 9 - 10 - - - 16 32 - - - Sulphur - 24 - 12 - - - 2 - 1 - - - 1 0 1 0 - Reprint 2025-26
18. Which one of the following is a correct electronic configuration of sodium? (a) 2.8 (b) 82,1 (c) 2.1.8 (d) 2,8,1. 19. Complete the following table. Atomic | Mass | Number |Number| Number | Name of Number |Number of of of the Atomic Neutrons | Protons |Electrons| Species 9 - 10 - - - 16 32 - - - Sulphur - 24 - 12 - - - 2 - 1 - - - 1 0 1 0 - 48 Sewack Reprint 2025-26