[Page 1]
In Chapter 3, we have learnt that atoms and molecules ar e the fundamental building blocks of matter . The existence of different kinds of matter is due to different atoms constituting them. Now the questions arise: (i) What makes the atom of one element differ ent from the atom of another element? and (ii) Ar e atoms r eally indivisible, as proposed by Dalton, or ar e ther e smaller constituents inside the atom? W e shall find out the answers to these questions in this chapter . W e will lear n about sub-atomic particles and the various models that have been proposed to explain how these particles are arranged within the atom. A major challenge before the scientists at the end of the 19th century was to reveal the structure of the atom as well as to explain its important properties. The elucidation of the structure of atoms is based on a series of experiments. One of the first indications that atoms are not indivisible, comes fr om studying static electricity and the condition under which electricity is conducted by different substances. 4.1 Charged Particles in Matter For understanding the nature of char ged particles in matter , let us carry out the following activities: Activity 4.1 A. Comb dry hair . Does the comb then attract small pieces of paper? B. Rub a glass r od with a silk cloth and bring the rod near an inflated balloon. Observe what happens. From these activities, can we conclude that on rubbing two objects together , they become electrically charged? Where does this charge come fr om? This question can be answered by knowing that an atom is divisible and consists of charged particles. Many scientists contributed in r evealing the presence of charged particles in an atom. It was known by 1900 that the atom was indivisible particle but contained at least one sub-atomic particle – the electron identified by J.J. Thomson. Even before the electron was identified, E. Goldstein in 1886 discovered the presence of new radiations in a gas discharge and called them canal rays. These rays were positively charged radiations which ultimately led to the discovery of another sub-atomic particle. This sub-atomic particle had a charge, equal in magnitude but opposite in sign to that of the electron. Its mass was approximately 2000 times as that of the electron. It was given the name of proton. In general, an electron is represented as ‘e –’ and a proton as ‘p +’. The mass of a proton is taken as one unit and its charge as plus one. The mass of an electron is considered to be negligible and its charge is minus one. It seemed that an atom was composed of protons and electrons, mutually balancing their charges. It also appeared that the protons were in the interior of the atom, for whereas electrons could easily be removed off but not protons. Now the big question was: what sort of structure did these particles of the atom for m? We will find the answer to this question below. 4 S SS SSTRUCTURETRUCTURETRUCTURETRUCTURETRUCTURE OF OFOF OFOF THE THETHE THETHE A A A A ATOM TOMTOM TOMTOM C hapter

[Page 2]
uestions 1. What are canal rays? 2. If an atom contains one electron and one proton, will it carry any charge or not? 4.2 The Structure of an Atom We have lear nt Dalton’s atomic theory in Chapter 3, which suggested that the atom was indivisible and indestructible. But the discovery of two fundamental particles (electrons and protons) inside the atom, led to the failure of this aspect of Dalton’s atomic theory. It was then consider ed necessary to know how electrons and protons are arranged within an atom. For explaining this, many scientists proposed various atomic models. J.J. Thomson was the first one to propose a model for the structure of an atom. 4.2.1 THOMSON’S MODEL OF AN ATOM Thomson proposed the model of an atom to be similar to that of a Christmas pudding. The electrons, in a sphere of positive charge, were like currants (dry fruits) in a spherical Christmas pudding. We can also think of a watermelon, the positive charge in the atom is spread all over like the r ed edible part of the water melon, while the electr ons ar e studded in the positively charged sphere, like the seeds in the watermelon (Fig. 4.1). Thomson proposed that: (i) An atom consists of a positively charged sphere and the electrons are embedded in it. (ii) The negative and positive charges are equal in magnitude. So, the atom as a whole is electrically neutral. Although Thomson’s model explained that atoms are electrically neutral, the results of experiments carried out by other scientists could not be explained by this model, as we will see below. 4.2.2 RUTHERFORD’S MODEL OF AN ATOM Ernest Rutherford was interested in knowing how the electr ons ar e arranged within an atom. Rutherford designed an experiment for this. In this experiment, fast moving alpha (α)-particles wer e made to fall on a thin gold foil. • He selected a gold foil because he wanted as thin a layer as possible. This gold foil was about 1000 atoms thick. • α-particles ar e doubly-char ged helium ions. Since they have a mass of 4 u, the fast-moving α-particles have a considerable amount of energy. • It was expected that α-particles would be deflected by the sub-atomic particles in the gold atoms. Since the α-particles were much heavier than the pr otons, he did not expect to see large deflections. Q Fig.4.1: Thomson’s model of an atom J.J. Thomson (1856– 1940), a British physicist, was born in Cheetham Hill, a suburb of Manchester , on 18 December 1856. He was awarded the Nobel prize in Physics in 1906 for his work on the discovery of electrons. He directed the Cavendish Laboratory at Cambridge for 35 years and seven of his research assistants subsequently won Nobel prizes. STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM 39

[Page 3]
SCIENCE40 Fig. 4.2: Scattering of α-particles by a gold foil But, the α-particle scattering experiment gave totally unexpected results (Fig. 4.2). The following observations were made: (i) Most of the fast moving α-particles passed straight through the gold foil. (ii) Some of the α-particles were deflected by the foil by small angles. (iii) Surprisingly one out of every 12000 particles appeared to rebound. In the wor ds of Ruther ford, “This result was almost as incr edible as if you fire a 15-inch shell at a piece of tissue paper and it comes back and hits you”. He will hear a sound when each stone strikes the wall. If he repeats this ten times, he will hear the sound ten times. But if a blind-folded child were to throw stones at a barbed-wire fence, most of the stones would not hit the fencing and no sound would be heard. This is because there are lots of gaps in the fence which allow the stone to pass through them. Following a similar reasoning, Rutherford concluded fr om the α-particle scattering experiment that— (i) Most of the space inside the atom is empty because most of the α-particles passed through the gold foil without getting deflected. (ii) V ery few particles were deflected from their path, indicating that the positive charge of the atom occupies very little space. (iii) A very small fraction of α-particles were deflected by 1800, indicating that all the positive charge and mass of the gold atom were concentrated in a very small volume within the atom. From the data he also calculated that the radius of the nucleus is about 105 times less than the radius of the atom. On the basis of his experiment, Rutherford put forward the nuclear model of an atom, which had the following features: (i) There is a positively charged centre in an atom called the nucleus. Nearly all the mass of an atom r esides in the nucleus. (ii) The electr ons r evolve ar ound the nucleus in circular paths. (iii) The size of the nucleus is very small as compared to the size of the atom. Drawbacks of Rutherford’s model of the atom The revolution of the electron in a circular orbit is not expected to be stable. Any particle in a circular orbit would undergo acceleration. During acceleration, charged particles would radiate energy. Thus, the revolving electron would lose energy and finally fall into the nucleus. If this were so, the atom should be highly unstable and hence matter would not exist in the form that we know. We know that atoms are quite stable. E. Rutherford (1871–1937) was born at Spring Gr ove on 30 August 1871. He was known as the ‘Father’ of nuclear physics. He is famous for his work on radioactivity and the discovery of the nucleus of an atom with the gold foil experiment. He got the Nobel prize in chemistry in 1908. Let us think of an activity in an open field to understand the implications of this experiment. Let a child stand in fr ont of a wall with his eyes closed. Let him thr ow stones at the wall from a distance.

[Page 4]
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM 41 4.2.3 BOHR’S MODEL OF ATOM In order to overcome the objections raised against Ruther ford’s model of the atom, Neils Bohr put forwar d the following postulates about the model of an atom: (i) Only certain special orbits known as discrete orbits of electrons, are allowed inside the atom. (ii) While revolving in discr ete orbits the electrons do not radiate energy. uestions 1. On the basis of Thomson’s model of an atom, explain how the atom is neutral as a whole. 2. On the basis of Ruther ford’s model of an atom, which sub- atomic particle is present in the nucleus of an atom? 3. Draw a sketch of Bohr’s model of an atom with three shells. 4. What do you think would be the observation if the α-particle scattering experiment is carried out using a foil of a metal other than gold? 4.2.4 NEUTRONS In 1932, J. Chadwick discovered another sub- atomic particle which had no char ge and a mass nearly equal to that of a proton. It was eventually named as neutron. Neutrons are present in the nucleus of all atoms, except hydr ogen. In general, a neutr on is represented as ‘n’. The mass of an atom is therefore given by the sum of the masses of protons and neutrons present in the nucleus. uestions 1. Name the thr ee sub-atomic particles of an atom. 2. Helium atom has an atomic mass of 4 u and two pr otons in its nucleus. How many neutr ons does it have? 4.3 How are Electrons Distributed in Different Orbits (Shells)? The distribution of electr ons into different orbits of an atom was suggested by Bohr and Bury. The following rules are followed for writing the number of electr ons in different energy levels or shells: (i) The maximum number of electr ons present in a shell is given by the Neils Bohr (1885–1962) was bor n in Copenhagen on 7 October 1885. He was appointed pr ofessor of physics at Copenhagen University in 1916. He got the Nobel prize for his work on the structure of atom in 1922. Among Pr ofessor Bohr’s numerous writings, three appearing as books are: (i) The Theory of Spectra and Atomic Constitution, (ii) Atomic Theory and, (iii) The Description of Nature. These orbits or shells are called energy levels. Energy levels in an atom are shown in Fig. 4.3. Q Fig. 4.3: A few energy levels in an atom These orbits or shells are represented by the letters K,L,M,N,… or the numbers, n=1,2,3,4,…. Q