SCIENCE36 Group Activity Play a game for writing formulae. Example1 : Make placards with symbols and valencies of the elements separately. Each student should hold two placards, one with the symbol in the right hand and the other with the valency in the left hand. Keeping the symbols in place, students should criss-cross their valencies to form the formula of a compound. Exercises 1. A 0.24 g sample of compound of oxygen and boron was found by analysis to contain 0.096 g of boron and 0.144 g of oxygen. Calculate the percentage composition of the compound by weight. 2. When 3.0 g of carbon is burnt in 8.00 g oxygen, 11.00 g of carbon dioxide is produced. What mass of carbon dioxide will be formed when 3.00 g of carbon is burnt in 50.00 g of oxygen? Which law of chemical combination will govern your answer? 3. What are polyatomic ions? Give examples. 4. Write the chemical for mulae of the following. (a) Magnesium chloride (b) Calcium oxide (c) Copper nitrate (d) Aluminium chloride (e) Calcium carbonate. 5. Give the names of the elements present in the following compounds. (a) Quick lime (b) Hydrogen bromide (c) Baking powder (d) Potassium sulphate. 6. Calculate the molar mass of the following substances. (a) Ethyne, C 2H2 (b) Sulphur molecule, S8 (c) Phosphorus molecule, P 4 (Atomic mass of phosphorus = 31) (d) Hydrochloric acid, HCl (e) Nitric acid, HNO 3 Reprint 2025-26
| ____)s Exercises _? 1. AOQ.24 g sample of compound of oxygen and boron was found T. by analysis to contain 0.096 g of boron and 0.144 g of oxygen. | — Caleulate the percentage composition of the compound by ay weight. Sd 2. When 3.0 g of carbon is burnt in 8.00 g oxygen, 11.00 g of carbon dioxide is produced. What mass of carbon dioxide will be formed when 3.00 g of carbon is burnt in 50.00 g of oxygen? Which law of chemical combination will govern your answer? 3. What are polyatomic ions? Give examples. 4. Write the chemical formulae of the following. (a) Magnesium chloride (b) Calcium oxide (ec) Copper nitrate (d) Aluminium chloride (ce) Caleium carbonate. 5. Give the names of the elements present in the following compounds. (a) Quick lime (b) Hydrogen bromide (ce) Baking powder (d) Potassium sulphate. 6. Calculate the molar mass of the following substances. (a) Ethyne, C,H, (b) Sulphur molecule, S, (c) Phosphorus molecule, P, (Atomic mass of phosphorus = 31) (d) Hydrochloric acid, HCl (ec) Nitric acid, HNO, [) Group Activity Ps ; RK Play a game for writing formulac. Sick N Example! : Make placards with symbols and valencies of the ve eS. elements separately. Each student should hold two \ SRS placards, one with the symbol in the right hand and Wee meee the other with the valency in the left hand. Keeping the symbols in place, students should criss-cross their valencies to form the formula of a compound. 36 Sewxer, : Reprint 2025-26