SCIENCE32 chloride ions (Cl–). A group of atoms carrying a charge is known as a polyatomic ion (Table 3.6). We shall learn more about the formation of ions in Chapter 4. learn the symbols and combining capacity of the elements. The combining power (or capacity) of an element is known as its valency. Valency can be used to find out how the atoms of an element will combine with the atom(s) of another element to form a chemical compound. The valency of the atom of an element can be thought of as hands or arms of that atom. Human beings have two arms and an octopus has eight. If one octopus has to catch hold of a few people in such a manner that all the eight arms of the octopus and both arms of all the humans are locked, how many humans do you think the octopus can hold? Represent the octopus with O and humans with H. Can you write a formula for this combination? Do you get OH4 as the formula? The subscript 4 indicates the number of humans held by the octopus. The valencies of some common ions are given in Table 3.6. We will learn more about valency in the next chapter. * Some elements show more than one valency. A Roman numeral shows their valency in a bracket. Table 3.5: Some ionic compounds Ionic Constituting Ratio Compound Elements by Mass Calcium oxide Calcium and oxygen 5:2 Magnesium Magnesium sulphide and sulphur 3:4 Sodium Sodium chloride and chlorine 23:35.5 3.4 Writing Chemical Formulae The chemical formula of a compound is a symbolic representation of its composition. The chemical formulae of different compounds can be written easily. For this exercise, we need to Table 3.6: Names and symbols of some ions Vale- Name of Symbol Non- Symbol Polyatomic Symbol ncy ion metallic ions element 1. Sodium Na+ Hydrogen H+ Ammonium NH4 + Potassium K+ Hydride H- Hydroxide OH– Silver Ag+ Chloride Cl- Nitrate NO3 – Copper (I)* Cu+ Bromide Br- Hydrogen Iodide I– carbonate HCO3 – 2. Magnesium Mg2+ Oxide O2- Carbonate CO3 2– Calcium Ca2+ Sulphide S2- Sulphite SO3 2– Zinc Zn2+ Sulphate SO4 2– Iron (II)* Fe2+ Copper (II)* Cu2+ 3. Aluminium Al3+ Nitride N3- Phosphate PO4 3– Iron (III)* Fe3+ Reprint 2025-26
chloride ions (Cl). A group of atoms carrying — learn the symbols and combining capacity of a charge is Known as a polyatomic ion (Table the elements. 3.6). We shall learn more about the formation The combining power (or capacity) of an of fons in Chapter 4. element is known as its valency. Valency can be used to find out how the atoms of an Table 3.5: Some ionic compounds . element will combine with the atom{(s) of Ionic Constituting | Ratio another element to form a chemical compound. Compound Elements by The valency of the atom of an element can be Mass thought of as hands or arms of that atom. Calcium oxide = Calcium and Human beings have two arms and an oxygen 5:2 octopus has eight. Ifone octopus has to catch Magnesium Magnesium hold of a few people in such a manner that all the eight arms of the octopus and both arms sulphide and sulphur 3:4 . of all the humans are locked, how many Sodium Sodium humans do you think the octopus can hold? chloride and chlorine 23:35.5 Represent the octopus with © and humans with H. Can you write a formula for this we . combination? Do you get OI,as the formula? 3.4 Writing Chemical Formulae The subscript 4 indicates the number of The chemical formula of a compound is a humans held by the octopus. symbolic representation of its composition. The The valencies of some common ions are chemical formulae of different compounds can given in Table 3.6. We will learn more about be written easily. For this exercise, we need to valency in the next chapter. Table 3.6: Names and symbols of some ions Vale- Name of Symbol Non- Symbol Polyatomic Symbol ney ion metallic ions element 1. Sodium Na’ Hydrogen H- Ammonium NH: Potassium K: Hydride HW Hydroxide OH Silver Ag Chloride cr Nitrate NO, Copper (I)* Cur Bromide Br Hydrogen lodide I- carbonate HCO; 2. Magnesium Mg?* Oxide oO Carbonate CO," Calcium Ca” Sulphide Ss? Sulphite so Zine zn?* Sulphate so,” Iron (II)* Fe?* Copper (I]* Cu** 3. Aluminium Al* Nitride N* Phosphate PO,” Iron (IID* Fe* “Some clements show more than one valency. A Roman mumeral shows their valency in a bracket, 32 Sewence Reprint 2025-26