ATOMS AND MOLECULES 33 3. Formula of carbon tetrachloride For magnesium chloride, we write the symbol of cation (Mg 2+) first followed by the symbol of anion (Cl-). Then their charges are criss-crossed to get the formula. 4. Formula of magnesium chloride Formula : MgCl2 Thus, in magnesium chloride, ther e are two chloride ions (Cl -) for each magnesium ion (Mg2+). The positive and negative charges must balance each other and the overall structure must be neutral. Note that in the formula, the charges on the ions are not indicated. Some more examples (a) Formula for aluminium oxide: Formula : Al2O3 (b) Formula for calcium oxide: Here, the valencies of the two elements are the same. You may arrive at the formula Ca2O2. But we simplify the formula as CaO. The rules that you have to follow while writing a chemical formula are as follows: • the valencies or charges on the ion must balance. • when a compound consists of a metal and a non-metal, the name or symbol of the metal is written first. For example: calcium oxide (CaO), sodium chloride (NaCl), iron sulphide (FeS), copper oxide (CuO), etc., where oxygen, chlorine, sulphur are non- metals and are written on the right, whereas calcium, sodium, iron and copper are metals, and are written on the left. • in compounds formed with polyatomic ions, the number of ions present in the compound is indicated by enclosing the formula of ion in a bracket and writing the number of ions outside the bracket. For example, Mg (OH)2. In case the number of polyatomic ion is one, the bracket is not required. For example, NaOH. 3.4.1 FORMULAE OF SIMPLE COMPOUNDS The simplest compounds, which are made up of two different elements are called binary compounds. Valencies of some ions are given in T able 3.6. Y ou can use these to write formulae for compounds. While writing the chemical formulae for compounds, we write the constituent elements and their valencies as shown below. Then we must crossover the valencies of the combining atoms. Examples 1. Formula of hydrogen chloride Formula of the compound would be HCl. 2. Formula of hydrogen sulphide Reprint 2025-26
The rules that you have to follow while writing 3. Formula of carbon tetrachloride a chemical formula are as follows: e the valencies or charges on the ion Symbol C Cl must balance. . e = when a compound consists of a metal and Valency DX 1 a non-metal, the name or symbol of the ° metal is written first. For example: calcium Formula : CCl, oxide (CaQ)., sodium chloride (NaCl). iron sulphide (FeS). copper oxide (CuQ), etc.. where oxygen. chlorine, sulphur are non- For magnesium chloride, we write the metals and are written on the right. symbol of cation (Mg”) first followed by the whereas calcium, sodium, iron and symbol of anion (Cl). Then their charges are copper are metals, and are written on hice crossed to get the formula. the left. 7 e = incompounds formed with polyatomic ions, 4. Formula of magnesium chloride the number of ions present in the compound is indicated by enclosing the Syinbol Mg Cl formula of ion ina bracket and writing the x number of ions outside the bracket. For Charge 2+ l- example, Mg (OH),. In case the number of . polyatomic ion is one, the bracket is not Formula : MgCl, required. For example, NaOH. 3.4.1 FORMULAE OF SIMPLE COMPOUNDS Thus, in magnesium chloride, there are two chloride ions (Cl) for each magnesium The simplest compounds, which are made up ion (Mg”). The positive and negative charges of two different elements are called binary must balance each other and the overall compounds. Valencies of some ions are given structure must be neutral. Note that in the in Table 3.6. You can use these to write | . “ . formulae for compounds. formula, the charges on the ions are While writing the chemical formulae for [0t indicated. compounds, we write the constituent elements and their valencies as shown below. Then we — Some more examples must crossover the valencies of the (a) Formula for aluminium oxide: combining atoms. Symbol al ) Examples x Charge 3+ 2- 1, Formula of hydrogen chloride Symbol H cl Formula : ALO. Valency OX 1 (b) Formula for calcium oxide: Formula of the compound would be HCL Symbol Ca fe) 2. Formula of hydrogen sulphide x : Charge 2+ 2- Symbol H S$ x Here, the valencies of the two elements Valency 1 2 are the same. You may arrive at the formula Formula : H,S Ca,O,. But we simplify the formula as CaO. Arous ann Motions 33 Reprint 2025-26 :