ATOMS AND MOLECULES 31 3.3.1 MOLECULES OF ELEMENTS The molecules of an element are constituted by the same type of atoms. Molecules of many elements, such as argon (Ar), helium (He) etc. are made up of only one atom of that element. But this is not the case with most of the non- metals. For example, a molecule of oxygen consists of two atoms of oxygen and hence it is known as a diatomic molecule, O 2. If 3 atoms of oxygen unite into a molecule, instead of the usual 2, we get ozone, O3. The number of atoms constituting a molecule is known as its atomicity. Metals and some other elements, such as carbon, do not have a simple structur e but consist of a very large and indefinite number of atoms bonded together. Let us look at the atomicity of some non-metals. Table 3.3 : Atomicity of some elements Type of Name Atomicity Element Non-Metal Argon Monoatomic Helium Monoatomic Oxygen Diatomic Hydrogen Diatomic Nitrogen Diatomic Chlorine Diatomic Phosphorus Tetra-atomic Sulphur Poly-atomic Table 3.4 : Molecules of some compounds Compound Combining Ratio Elements by Mass Water (H2O) Hydrogen, Oxygen 1:8 Ammonia (NH3) Nitrogen, Hydrogen 14:3 Carbon dioxide (CO2) Carbon, Oxygen 3:8 Activity ______________ 3.2 • Refer to Table 3.4 for ratio by mass of atoms present in molecules and Table 3.2 for atomic masses of elements. Find the ratio by number of the atoms of elements in the molecules of compounds given in Table 3.4. • The ratio by number of atoms for a water molecule can be found as follows: Element Ratio Atomic Mass Simplest by mass ratio/ ratio mass (u) atomic mass H 1 1 1 1 =1 2 O 8 16 8 16 = 1 2 1 • Thus, the ratio by number of atoms for water is H:O = 2:1. 3.3.3 WHAT IS AN ION? Compounds composed of metals and non- metals contain charged species. The char ged species are known as ions. Ions may consist of a single charged atom or a group of atoms that have a net charge on them. An ion can be negatively or positively charged. A negatively charged ion is called an ‘anion’ and the positively charged ion, a ‘cation’. Take, for example, sodium chloride (NaCl). Its constituent particles are positively charged sodium ions (Na +) and negatively charged 3.3.2 MOLECULES OF COMPOUNDS Atoms of different elements join together in definite proportions to form molecules of compounds. Few examples are given in Table 3.4. Reprint 2025-26
3.3.1, MOLECULES OF ELEMENTS Table 3.4 : Molecules of some The molecules of an element are constituted compounds by the same type of atoms. Molecules of many Compound Combining Ratio elements, such as argon (Ar), helium (He) ete. Elements by are made up of only one atom of that element. Mass But this is not the case with most of the non- Water (HO) Hydrogen, Oxygen 1:8 metals. For example, a molecule of oxygen Ammonia (NH,) Nitrogen. Hydrogen 14:3 consists of two atoms of oxygen and hence it k d nolecule, O,. 163 CarPen is known as a diatomic molecule, O,. 3 dioxide (CO,) Carbon. Oxygen 3:8 atoms of oxygen unite into a molecule, instead of the usual 2, we get ozone, O,. The number . of atoms constituting a molecule is known as Activity 3 its atomicity. ¢ — Refer to Table 3.4 for ratio by mass of Metals and some other elements, such as atoms present in molecules and Table carbon, do not have a simple structure but 3.2 for atomic masses of elements. Find . . . the ratio by number of the atoms of consist of a very large and indefinite number 7. . elements in the molecules of of atoms bonded together. compounds given in Table 3.4. Let us look at the atomicity of some e = The ratio by number of atoms for a non-metals. water molecule can he found as follows: Element | Ratio |Atomic| Mass |Simplest Table 3.3 : Atomicity of some by | mass | ratio/| ratio elements mass | (u) [atomic mass Type of Name Atomicity oy = 1 Element. H 1 1 7 =] 2 Non-Metal Argon Monoatomic gol Helium Monoatomic ce) 8 16 iar l 6 Oxygen Diatomic drog . . ¢ ‘Thus, the ratio by number of atoms tor Hydrogen Diatomic water is HO = 2:1, Nitrogen Diatomic Chlorine Diatomic 3.3.3, WHAT IS AN ION? Phosphorus — Tetra-atomic Compounds composed of metals and non- Sulphur Poly-atomic metals contain charged species. The charged . species are known as fons. lons may consist of a single charged atom or a group of atoms that have a net charge on them. An ion can be negatively or positively charged. A negatively 3.3.2 MOLECULES OF COMPOUNDS charged ion is called an ‘anion’ and the Atoms of different elements join together positively charged ion, a ‘cation’. Take. for in definite proportions to form molecules example. sodium chloride (NaCl). Its of compounds. Few examples are given in constituent particles are positively charged Table 3.4. sodium ions (Na‘) and negatively charged Arous ann Motions 31 Reprint 2025-26