ATOMS AND MOLECULES 29 In the beginning, the names of elements were derived from the name of the place where they were found for the first time. For example, the name copper was taken from Cyprus. Some names were taken from specific colours. For example, gold was taken from the English word meaning yellow. Now-a-days, IUPAC (International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry) is an international scientific organisation which approves names of elements, symbols and units. Many of the symbols are the first one or two letters of the element’s name in English. The first letter of a symbol is always written as a capital letter (uppercase) and the second letter as a small letter (lowercase). For example (i) hydrogen, H (ii) aluminium, Al and not AL (iii) cobalt, Co and not CO. Symbols of some elements are formed from the first letter of the name and a letter , appearing later in the name. Examples are: (i) chlorine, Cl, (ii) zinc, Zn etc. Other symbols have been taken from the names of elements in Latin, German or Greek. For example, the symbol of iron is Fe from its Latin name ferrum, sodium is Na from natrium, potassium is K from kalium. Therefore, each element has a name and a unique chemical symbol. (The above table is given for you to refer to whenever you study about elements. Do not bother to memorise all in one go. With the passage of time and repeated usage you will automatically be able to reproduce the symbols). 3.2.2 ATOMIC MASS The most remarkable concept that Dalton’s atomic theory proposed was that of the atomic mass. According to him, each element had a characteristic atomic mass. The theory could explain the law of constant proportions so well that scientists were prompted to measure the atomic mass of an atom. Since determining the mass of an individual atom was a relatively difficult task, relative atomic masses were determined using the laws of chemical combinations and the compounds formed. Let us take the example of a compound, carbon monoxide (CO) formed by carbon and oxygen. It was observed experimentally that 3 g of carbon combines with 4 g of oxygen to form CO. In other words, carbon combines with 4/3 times its mass of oxygen. Suppose we define the atomic mass unit (earlier abbreviated as ‘amu’, but according to the latest IUPAC recommendations, it is now written as ‘u’ – unified mass) as equal to the mass of one carbon atom, then we would assign carbon an atomic mass of 1.0 u and oxygen an atomic mass of 1.33 u. However, it is more convenient to have these numbers as Table 3.1: Symbols for some elements Element Symbol Element Symbol Element Symbol Aluminium Al Copper Cu Nitrogen N Argon Ar Fluorine F Oxygen O Barium Ba Gold Au Potassium K Boron B Hydrogen H Silicon Si Bromine Br Iodine I Silver Ag Calcium Ca Iron Fe Sodium Na Carbon C Lead Pb Sulphur S Chlorine Cl Magnesium Mg Uranium U Cobalt Co Neon Ne Zinc Zn Reprint 2025-26
In the beginning, the names ofelements passage of time and repeated usage you will were derived from the name of the place automatically be able to reproduce where they were found for the first time. For the symbols). example, the name copper was taken from Cyprus. Some names were taken from se . vee specific colours. For example. gold was taken 3.2.2 ATOMIC MASS from the English word meaning yellow. The most remarkable concept that Dalton’s Now-a-days, IUPAC {International Union of atomic theory proposed was that of the atomic Pure and Applied Chemistry) is an ass. Ace di sto hi ach element had ¢ international scientific organisation which — M@SS. According to him, each element had a approves names of elements, symbols and — characteristic atomic mass. The theory could units. Many of the symbols are the first one explain the law of constant proportions so well or two letters of the element's name in that scientists were prompted to measure the English. The first letter ofa symbol is always atomic mass of an atom. Since determining the written as a capital letter (uppercase) and the mass of an individual atom was a relatively second letter as a small letter (lowercase). , . difficult task, relative atomic masses were For example determined using the laws of chemical (i) hydrogen, H combinations and the compounds formed. (ii) aluminium, Aland not Al. Let us take the example of a compound, (iii) cobalt, Co and not CO. carbon monoxide (CO) formed by carbon and Symbols of some elements are formed from oxygen. It was observed experimentally that 3 the first letter of the name and a letter, ¢ of carbon combines with 4 g of oxygen to tine in the name. Examples are: (i form CO. In other words, carbon combines Other symbols have been taken from the with 4/3 times its mass of oxygen. Suppose names of elements in Latin, German or Greek. We define the atomic mass unit (earlier For example, the symbol of iron is Fe from its — abbreviated as ‘amu’, but according to the Latin name ferrum, sodium is Na from natrium, latest IUPAC recommendations, it is now potassium is K from kalium, Therefore. each written as ‘uv’ - unified mass) as equal to the element has a name and a unique mass of one carbon atom, then we would chemical symbol. Table 3.1: Symbols for some elements Element Symbol Element Symbol Element Symbol Aluminium Al Copper Cu Nitrogen N Argon Ar Fluorine F Oxygen 0 Barium Ba Gold Au Potassium K Boron B Hydrogen H Silicon St Bromine Br lodine I Silver Ag Calcium Ca Iron Fe Sodium Na Carbon Cc Lead Pb Sulphur $s Chlorine cl Magnesium Mg Uranium U Cobalt Co Neon Ne Zinc zn (The above table is given for you to refer to assign carbon an atomic mass of 1.0 u and whenever you study about elements. Do not oxygen an atomic mass of 1.33 u. However, it bother to memorise all in one go. With the — is more convenient to have these numbers as Arous ann Motions 29 Reprint 2025-26