Ancient Indian and Greek philosophers have always wonder ed about the unknown and unseen form of matter. The idea of divisibility of matter was considered long back in India, around 500 BC. An Indian philosopher Maharishi Kanad, postulated that if we go on dividing matter (padarth), we shall get smaller and smaller particles. Ultimately, a stage will come when we shall come across the smallest particles beyond which further division will not be possible. He named these particles Par manu . Another Indian philosopher , Pakudha Katyayama, elaborated this doctrine and said that these particles nor mally exist in a combined for m which gives us various forms of matter. Around the same era, ancient Gr eek philosophers – Democritus and Leucippus suggested that if we go on dividing matter, a stage will come when particles obtained cannot be divided further. Democritus called these indivisible particles atoms (meaning indivisible). All this was based on philosophical considerations and not much experimental work to validate these ideas could be done till the eighteenth century. By the end of the eighteenth century, scientists r ecognised the difference between elements and compounds and naturally became interested in finding out how and why elements combine and what happens when they combine. Antoine L. Lavoisier laid the foundation of chemical sciences by establishing two important laws of chemical combination. 3.1 Laws of Chemical Combination The following two laws of chemical combination were established after much experimentations by Lavoisier and Joseph L. Proust. 3.1.1 LAW OF CONSERVATION OF MASS Is there a change in mass when a chemical change (chemical reaction) takes place? Activity ______________ 3.1 • Take one of the following sets, X and Y of chemicals— X Y (i) copper sulphate sodium carbonate (ii) barium chloride sodium sulphate (iii) lead nitrate sodium chloride • Prepare separately a 5% solution of any one pair of substances listed under X and Y each in 10 mL in water. • Take a little amount of solution of Y in a conical flask and some solution of X in an ignition tube. • Hang the ignition tube in the flask carefully; see that the solutions do not get mixed. Put a cork on the flask (see Fig. 3.1). Fig. 3.1: Ignition tube containing solution of X, dipped in a conical flask containing solution of Y 3 AAA AATOMS TOMSTOMS TOMSTOMS AND ANDAND ANDAND M M M M MOLECULESOLECULESOLECULESOLECULESOLECULES C hapter Reprint 2025-26
op =o haptered nb ER ol ope oe vriet 98 ATOMS AND MOLECULES Ancient Indian and Greek philosophers have = much experimentations by Lavoisier and always wondered about the unknown and — Joseph L. Proust. unseen form of matter. The idea of divisibility of matter was considered long back in India. — 3.1.1. LAW OF CONSERVATION OF MASS around 500 BC. An Indian philosopher Maharishi Kanad, postulated that ifwe goon Is there a change in mass when a chemical dividing matter (padarth), we shall get smaller change (chemical reaction) takes place? and smaller particles. Ultimately, a stage will sttest come when we shall come across the smallest Activity — 3.1 particles beyond which further division will e Take one of the following sets, X and Y not be possible. He named these particles of chemicals— : Parmanu. Another Indian philosopher. xX Y Pakudha Katyayama, elaborated this doctrine (i) copper sulphate sodium carbonate and said that these particles normally exist in a combined form which gives us various Qi} harium chloride sodium sulphate forms of matter. Around the same era, ancient Greek (iii) lead nitrate sodium chloride philosophers - Democritus and Leucippus | suggested that if we go on dividing matter, a ° Prepare separately a 5% solution of whe , . sth, artiolme . any one pair of substances listed stage will come when particles obtained ler X and Y cach in 10 ml in water cannot be divided further. Democritus called an : re ae . « ‘ van . Take a little amount of solution of Y in these indivisible particles atoms (meaning a conical flask and some solution of indivisible). All this was hased on X in an ignition tube. philosophical considerations and not much * Hang the ignition tube in the flask experimental work to validate these ideas carefully: see that the solutions do not could be done till the eighteenth century. get mixed. Put a cork on the flask By the end of the eighteenth century. (see Fig. 3.1). scientists recognised the difference between Yn Cork elements and compounds and naturally Y became interested in finding out how and why Uy 6 Thread elements combine and what happens when they combine. . Conical flask Antoine L. Lavoisier laid the foundation \ of chemical sciences by establishing two <3 Small ignition tube important laws of chemical combination. a ]*\ Solution of X 3.1 Laws of Chemical Combination Et Sohation of ¥ The following two laws of chemical Fig. 3.1: ignition tube containing solution of X, dipped combination were established after tna conical flask containing solution of ¥ Reprint 2025-26