SCIENCE28 We might think that if atoms ar e so insignificant in size, why should we care about them? This is because our entire world is made up of atoms. We may not be able to see them, but they are there, and constantly affecting whatever we do. Through modern techniques, we can now produce magnified images of surfaces of elements showing atoms. observations are in agreement with the law of conservation of mass. sodium carbonate + acetic acid → sodium acetate + carbon dioxide + water 2. Hydrogen and oxygen combine in the ratio of 1:8 by mass to form water. What mass of oxygen gas would be r equir ed to react completely with 3 g of hydrogen gas? 3. Which postulate of Dalton’s atomic theory is the result of the law of conservation of mass? 4. Which postulate of Dalton’s atomic theory can explain the law of definite proportions? 3.2 What is an Atom? Have you ever observed a mason building walls, from these walls a r oom and then a collection of rooms to form a building? What is the building block of the huge building? What about the building block of an ant-hill? It is a small grain of sand. Similarly, the building blocks of all matter are atoms. How big are atoms? Atoms are very small, they are smaller than anything that we can imagine or compar e with. Mor e than millions of atoms when stacked would make a layer barely as thick as this sheet of paper. Atomic radius is measured in nanometres. 1/10 9 m = 1 nm 1 m = 109 nm Relative Sizes Radii (in m) Example 10–10 Atom of hydrogen 10–9 Molecule of water 10–8 Molecule of haemoglobin 10–4 Grain of sand 10–3 Ant 10–1 Apple Fig. 3.2: An image of the surface of silicon 3.2.1 WHAT ARE THE MODERN DAY SYMBOLS OF ATOMS OF DIFFERENT ELEMENTS ? Dalton was the first scientist to use the symbols for elements in a very specific sense. When he used a symbol for an element he also meant a definite quantity of that element, that is, one atom of that element. Berzilius suggested that the symbols of elements be made from one or two letters of the name of the element. Fig. 3.3: Symbols for some elements as proposed by Dalton Reprint 2025-26
observations are in agreement We might think that if atoms are so with the law of conservation of insignificant in size, why should we care about LISS, them? This is because our entire world is made sodium carbonate + acctic acid up of atoms. We may not be able to see them, » sodium acctate + carbon but they are there, and constantly affecting dioxide + water whatever we do. Through modern techniques, 2. Hydrogen and oxvgcn combine in we can now produce magnified images of the ratio of 1:8 by mass to form surfaces of elements showing atoms. Water, What mass of oXVECH Gas . would be requircd to react completely with 3 g of hydrogen gas? & Which postulate of Dalton’s atomic (heory is the result of the law of conscrvation of niass? 4. Which postulate of Dalton’s atomic theory can explain dhe baw of detinite proporions? 3.2 What is an Atom? Have you ever observed a mason building walls, from these walls a room and then a Fig. 3.2: An finage of the surface of silicon collection of rooms to form a building? What is the building block of the huge building? What about the building block ofan ant-hill? 3.2.1 WHAT ARE THE MODERN DAY It is a small grain of sand. Similarly, the SYMBOLS OF ATOMS OF DIFFERENT building blocks of all matter are atoms. ELEMENTS? How big are atoms? Dalton was the first scientist to use the Atoms are very small, they are smaller than . tee sien os canes symbols for elements in a very specific sense. anything that we can imagine or compare i . - : oa ee : When he used a symbol for an element he with. More than millions of atoms when : . . also meant a definite quantity of that element. stacked would make a layer barely as thick . - ae we , . that is. one atom of that element. Berzilius as this sheet of paper. : suggested that the symbols of elements be Atomic radius fs measured in nanometres. made from one or two letters of the name of 1/10*m = Inm the element. lm = 10%nm Relative Sizes () Hydrogen OQ Carbon @ Oxygen Radit (in m) 4 s a or - Molecule of water (cS) Copper @ Lead (8) Silver Molecule of haemoglobin - Fig. 3.3: Syinbols for some elernents as proposed by Apple hen 28 Sewence Reprint 2025-26