IS MATTER AROUND US PURE? 17 (ii) Mass by volume percentage of a solution Mass of solute= ×100 Volume of solution (iii) Volume by volume per centage of a solution Volume of solute= ×100 Volume of solution Example 2.1 A solution contains 40 g of common salt in 320 g of water. Calculate the concentration in terms of mass by mass percentage of the solution. Solution: Mass of solute (salt) = 40 g Mass of solvent (water) = 320 g We know, Mass of solution = Mass of solute + Mass of solvent = 40 g + 320 g = 360 g Mass percentage of solution Mass of solute= ×100 Massof solution 40= ×100 =11.1% 360 2.2.2 WHAT IS A SUSPENSION? Non-homogeneous systems, like those obtained by group C in activity 2.2, in which solids are dispersed in liquids, are called suspensions. A suspension is a heterogeneous mixture in which the solute particles do not dissolve but remain suspended throughout the bulk of the medium. Particles of a suspension are visible to the naked eye. Properties of a Suspension • Suspension is a heterogeneous mixture. • The particles of a suspension can be seen by the naked eye. • The particles of a suspension scatter a beam of light passing through it and make its path visible. • The solute particles settle down when a suspension is left undisturbed, that is, a suspension is unstable. They can be separated from the mixture by the process of filtration. When the particles settle down, the suspension breaks and it does not scatter light any more. 2.2.3 WHAT IS A COLLOIDAL SOLUTION? The mixture obtained by group D in activity 2.2 is called a colloid or a colloidal solution. The particles of a colloid are uniformly spread throughout the solution. Due to the relatively smaller size of particles, as compared to that of a suspension, the mixture appears to be homogeneous. But actually, a colloidal solution is a heterogeneous mixture, for example, milk. Because of the small size of colloidal particles, we cannot see them with naked eyes. But, these particles can easily scatter a beam of visible light as observed in activity 2.2. This scattering of a beam of light is called the Tyndall effect after the name of the scientist who discovered this effect. Tyndall effect can also be observed when a fine beam of light enters a room through a small hole. This happens due to the scattering of light by the particles of dust and smoke in the air. Fig. 2.3: (a) Solution of copper sulphate does not show Tyndall effect, (b) mixture of water and milk shows Tyndall effect. (a) (b) Reprint 2025-26
(ii) Mass by volume percentage of a solution e =The particles of a suspension scatter a beam of light passing through it and = Mass of solute x100 make its path visible. Volume of solution ¢ = The solute particles settle down when a (iii) Volume by volume percentage of a suspension is left undisturbed, that is, solution a suspension is unstable. They can be Volume of solute separated from the mixture by the = $$$ — _ «100 process of filtration. When the particles Volume of solution settle down, the suspension breaks and ll it does not scatter light any more. Example 2.1 A solution contains 40 g of j . common salt in 320 g of water. Calculate ne tee . . vate the concentration in terms of mass by 2.2.3 WHAT IS A COLLOIDAL SOLUTION? mass percentage of the solution. The mixture obtained by group 1 in activity Solution: 2.2 is called a colloid or a colloidal solution. Mass of solute (salt) = 40g The particles ofa colloid are uniformly spread Mass of solvent (water) = 320 ¢ throughout the solution. Due to the relatively We know, ° smaller size of particles, as compared to that of Massof solution = Mass of solute + a suspension, the mixture appears to be Mass of solvent homogeneous. But actually, a colloidal solution = 40 ¢+ 3208 is a heterogeneous mixture, for example, milk. = 360 g Because of the small size of colloidal Mass percentage of solution particles, we cannot see them with naked eyes. 7 But, these particles can easily scatter a beam __Mass of solute «100 of visible light as observed in activity 2.2. This Massof solution scattering of a beam of light is called the Tyndall effect after the name of the scientist 40 who discovered this effect. = apy * 100 = 11.1% Tyndall effect can also be observed when a 360 TTT .2520T0"”,T’enwmm_ fine beam of light enters a room through a small 2.2.2 WHAT IS A SUSPENSION? hole. This happens due to the scattering of light by the particles of dust and smoke in the air. Non-homogeneous systems, like those obtained by group C in activity 2.2. in which solids are dispersed in liquids, are called suspensions. A suspension is a heterogeneous = mixture in which the solute particles do not | dissolve but remain suspended throughout eat) . han al the bulk of the medium. Particles of a Torch ' becomes suspension are visible to the naked eye. | | visible er Properties of a Suspension (a) (b) ¢ Suspension is a heterogeneous mixture. Fig. 2.3: (a) Sohition of copper sulphate does not ¢ = The particles ofa suspension can be seen show Tyndall effect, (bj mixture of waiter by the naked eye. and milk shows Tyndall effect. Is Marten Arotan Us Pt xe? 17 Reprint 2025-26 :