Fig. 2.1: Some consumable items Have you ever noticed the word ‘pure’ written on the packs of these consumables? For a common person pure means having no adulteration. But, for a scientist all these things are actually mixtures of different substances and hence not pure. For example, milk is actually a mixture of water, fat, proteins, etc. When a scientist says that something is pure, it means that all the constituent particles of that substance are the same in their chemical nature. A pure substance consists of a single type of particle. In other words, a substance is a pure single form of matter. As we look around, we can see that most of the matter around us exists as mixtures of two or more pure components, for example, sea water, minerals, soil, etc., are all mixtures. 2.1 What is a Mixture? Mixtures are constituted by more than one kind of pur e for m of matter . We know that dissolved sodium chloride can be separated from water by the physical process of evaporation. However, sodium chloride is itself a pure substance and cannot be separated by physical process into its chemical constituents. Similarly, sugar is a substance which contains only one kind of pure matter and its composition is the same throughout. Soft drink and soil are not single pure substances. Whatever the source of a pure substance may be, it will always have the same characteristic properties. Therefore, we can say that a mixture contains more than one pure substance. 2.1.1 TYPES OF MIXTURES Depending upon the nature of the components that form a mixture, we can have different types of mixtures. Activity ______________ 2.1 • Let us divide the class into groups A, B, C and D. • Group A takes a beaker containing 50 mL of water and one spatula full of copper sulphate powder . Gr oup B takes 50 mL of water and two spatula full of copper sulphate powder in a beaker. • Groups C and D can take different amounts of copper sulphate and potassium permanganate or common salt (sodium chloride) and mix the given components to form a mixture. • Report the observations on the uniformity in colour and texture. • Groups A and B have obtained a mixture which has a uniform composition throughout. Such mixtures are called homogeneous mixtures or solutions. Some other examples of such mixtures are: (i) salt dissolved in water and (ii) sugar dissolved in water . Compar e the How do we judge whether milk, ghee, butter, salt, spices, mineral water or juice that we buy from the market are pure? 2 III IIS SS SS M M M M MATTER ATTERATTER ATTERATTER A A A A AROUND ROUNDROUND ROUNDROUND U U U U US SS SS P P P P PURE UREURE UREURE? ?? ?? C hapter Reprint 2025-26
Or || C ee hapter 2 fa wre 92 Is Matter ArounD Us Pure? How do we judge whether milk, ghee, butter, a pure substance and cannot he separated by salt, spices, mineral water or juice that we buy physical process into its chemical constituents. from the market are pure? Similarly, sugar is a substance which contains only one kind of pure matter and its —— composition is the same throughout. P, oa Mitx DP Soft drink and soil are not single pure pire t, substances. Whatever the source of a SALT Glee Ge pure substance may be, it will always have y : ‘ : an say that a mixture — * contains more than one pure substance. 2.1.1 Types OF MIXTURES Fig. 2.1: Some consumable titers Depending upon the nature of the components Have you ever noticed the word ‘pure’ that form a mixture, we can have different written on the packs of these consumables? types of mixtures. For a common person pure means having no Activity 2.1 adulteration. But, fora scientist all these things re are actually mixtures of different substances © = Let us divide the class into groups A. and hence not pure. For example. milk is B,C and D. actually a mixture of water, fat, proteins, ete. ¢ Group A takes a beaker containing When a scientist says that something is pure. 50 ml. of water and one spatula full it means that all the constituent particles of of copper sulphate powder. Group B takes 50 mL of water and two spatula that substance are the same in their chemical full of copper sulphate powder in a nature. A pure substance consists of a single heaker. type of particle. In other words, a substance is e Groups € and 1D can take different a pure single form of matter. amounts of copper sulphate and As we look around, we can see that most potassium permanganate or common of the matter around us exists as mixtures of salt {sodium chloride] and mix the . given components to form a mixture. two or more pure components, for example. ® Report the observations on the sea water, minerals, soil, etc., are all mixtures. uniformity in colour and texture. : : . Groups A and B have obtained a 2.1 What isa Mixture? mixture which has a uniform Mixtures are constituted by more than one composition throughout, Such kind of pure form of matter. We know that mixtures are called homogencous mixtures or solutions. Some other dissolved sodium chloride can be separated examples of such mixtures are: (i) salt from water by the physical process of dissolved in water and (i) sugar evaporation. However, sodium chloride is itself dissolved in water. Compare the Reprint 2025-26