SCIENCE20 chlorine etc. Some elements have intermediate properties between those of metals and non- metals, they are called metalloids; examples are boron, silicon, germanium, etc. More to know 2.4.2 COMPOUNDS A compound is a substance composed of two or more elements, chemically combined with one another in a fixed proportion. What do we get when two or more elements are combined? Activity ______________ 2.4 • Divide the class into two groups. Give 5 g of iron filings and 3 g of sulphur powder in a china dish to both the groups. Group I • Mix and crush iron filings and sulphur powder . Group II • Mix and crush iron filings and sulphur powder . Heat this mixtur e strongly till red hot. Remove from flame and let the mixture cool. Groups I and II • Check for magnetism in the material obtained. Bring a magnet near the material and check if the material is attracted towards the magnet. • Compare the texture and colour of the material obtained by the groups. • Add carbon disulphide to one part of the material obtained. Stir well and filter. • Add dilute sulphuric acid or dilute hydrochloric acid to the other part of the material obtained. (Note: teacher supervision is necessary for this activity). • Perform all the above steps with both the elements (iron and sulphur) separately. Now answer • Did the material obtained by the two groups look the same? • Which group has obtained a material with magnetic properties? • Can we separate the components of the material obtained? • On adding dilute sulphuric acid or dilute hydrochloric acid, did both the groups obtain a gas? Did the gas in both the cases smell the same or different? The gas obtained by Group I is hydrogen, it is colourless, odourless and combustible– it is not advised to do the combustion test for hydrogen in the class. The gas obtained by Group II is hydrogen sulphide. It is a colourless gas with the smell of rotten eggs. You must have observed that the products obtained by both the groups show different properties, though the starting materials were the same. Group I has carried out the activity involving a physical change whereas in case of Group II, a chemical change (a chemical reaction) has taken place. • The material obtained by group I is a mixture of the two substances. The substances given are the elements—iron and sulphur. • The properties of the mixture are the same as that of its constituents. • The number of elements known at present are more than 100. Ninety-two elements are naturally occurring and the rest are man-made. • Majority of the elements are solid. • Eleven elements are in gaseous state at room temperature. • Two elements are liquid at room temperature—mercury and bromine. • Elements, gallium and cesium become liquid at a temperature slightly above room temperature (303 K). Reprint 2025-26
chlorine etc. Some elements have intermediate ¢ Compare the texture and colour of the properties between those of metals and non- material obtained by the groups. metals, they are called metalloids; examples * Add carbon disulphide to one part of are boron, silicon, germanium, ete. the material obtained. Stir well . and filter. © The number of elements . Add dilute sulphuric acid or dilute known at present are more hydrochloric acid to the other part of é < z than 100. Ninety-two elements the material obtained. (Note: teacher are naturally occurring and the pees is necessary for > rest are man-made. this activity). >i . . Perform all the above steps with both ° Majority of the elements are - < solid the elements (iron and sulphur) <4 a separately. © Eleven elements are in gaseous . g state at room temperature. N ; ; ha 6° «Two elements are liquid at ow answer ° room temperature—mercury => and bromine . e) Did the material obtained by the two ¢ Elements, gallium and cesium groups look the same? become liquid at a temperature e Which group has obtained a material slightly above — room with magnetic propertics? temperature (303 K). . . pere {303 K) ¢ Canwe separate the componcuts of the material obtained? SCT -NITDE 2.4.2 COMPOUNDS e On adding dilute sulphuric acid or A compound is a substance composed of two dilute hydrochloric acid, did both the or more elements, chemically combined with groups obtain a gas? Did the gas in one another in a fixed proportion. both the cases smell the saine What do we get when two or more elements or different? are combined? on . . The gas obtained by Group I is hydrogen, Activity 2.4 it is colourless, odourless and combustible- it is not advised to do the combustion test for * Divide the class into two groups. Give hydrogen in the class. The gas obtained by 5 g of iron filings and 3 g of sulphur . . . - eens Group IL is hydrogen sulphide. It is a colourless powder in a china dish to both ° the groups. gas with the smell of rotten eggs. G , You must have observed that the products TOU 4 ue P Gg a . obtained by both the groups show different . Mix and crush iron filings and . sulphur powder. properties, though the starting materials were the same. Group I has carried out the activity Group involving a physical change whereas { vase e Mix and crush iron filings and ne wing a physical change whereas In Case sulphur powder. Heat this mixture of Group IL, a chemical change (a chemical strongly Ull red hot. Remove from reaction) has taken place. flame and let the mixture cool. * The material obtained by group I is a Groups 1 and 1 mixture of the two substances. The * Check for magnetism in the material substances given are the elements—iron obtained. Bring a magnet near the and sulphur. material and check if the material is ° The properties of the mixture are the attracted towards the magnet. 7 same as that of its constituents. 20 Science Reprint 2025-26