IS MATTER AROUND US PURE? 21 • The material obtained by group II is a compound. • On heating the two elements strongly we get a compound, which has totally different properties compared to the combining elements. • The composition of a compound is the same throughout. We can also observe that the texture and the colour of the compound are the same throughout. Thus, we can summarise the physical and chemical nature of matter in the following graphical organiser: Table 2.2: Mixtures and Compounds Mixtures Compounds 1. Elements or compounds just mix 1. Elements react to form new compounds. together to form a mixture and no new compound is formed. 2. A mixture has a variable composition. 2. The composition of each new substance is always fixed. 3, A mixture shows the properties of the 3. The new substance has totally different constituent substances. properties. 4. The constituents can be seperated 4. The constituents can be separated only fairly easily by physical methods. by chemical or electrochemical reactions. What you have learnt • A mixture contains more than one substance (element and/ or compound) mixed in any proportion. Reprint 2025-26
Table 2.2: Mixtures and Compounds Mixtures Compounds 1, Elements or compounds just mix 1. Elements react to form new compounds. together to form a mixture and no new compound is formed. 2. Amixture has a variable composition. 2. The composition of each new substance is always fixed. 3. Amixture shows the properties ofthe 3. © The new substance has totally different constituent substances. properties. 4. The constituents can be seperated 4. The constituents can be separated only fairly easily by physical methods. by chemical or electrochemical reactions. ¢ = The material obtained by group II is a * The composition of a compound is the compound. same throughout. We can also observe ¢ = Onheating the two elements strongly we that the texture and the colour of the get a compound, which has totally compound are the same throughout. different properties compared to the Thus, we can summarise the physical combining elements. and chemical nature of matter in the following graphical organiser: Matter (Solid. Liquid or Gas) Pure Substance Mixtures (No Fixed Composition} Cannot be broken d Have fixed composition ‘annot be broken down ‘an be brok h . ; to simpler substances Can be broken down into Unitorm composition Non-uniform composition electrochemical reactions for example, copper for example, water for example. ee iphur in for example, sand and oxygen, iron, hydrogen, than ayrdeee caly yetee aN aren § ao sall, sugar and salt. mercury, ee. methane. sugar, salt. ete. carbon disulphide, water water in oil, etc, in alcohol, ete. e & if you have - fog foe te pay ven F > Ma fo learnt —_Y ° A mixture contains more than one substance (element and/ or compound) mixed in any proportion. Is Marten Arnot nn Us Pr nec? 21 Reprint 2025-26