[Page 7]
THE FUNDAMENTAL UNIT OF LIFE 55 uestion 1. Fill in the gaps in the following table illustrating dif ferences between pr okaryotic and eukaryotic cells. Prokaryotic Cell Eukaryotic Cell 1. Size : generally 1. Size: generally small ( 1-10 µ m) large ( 5-100 µ m) 1 µ m = 10–6 m 2. Nuclear region: 2. Nuclear region: _______________ well defined and _______________ surrounded by a and known as__ nuclear membrane 3. Chromosome: 3. More than one single chromosome 4. Membrane-bound 4. _______________ cell organelles _______________ absent _______________ 5.2.5 CELL ORGANELLES Every cell has a membrane around it to keep its own contents separate from the external envir onment. Lar ge and complex cells, including cells from multicellular organisms, need a lot of chemical activities to support their complicated structure and function. To keep these activities of dif ferent kinds separate fr om each other , these cells use membrane-bound little structures (or ‘organelles’) within themselves. This is one of the featur es of the eukaryotic cells that distinguish them from prokaryotic cells. Some of these or ganelles are visible only with an electron microscope. We have talked about the nucleus in a previous section. Some important examples of cell organelles which we will discuss now are: endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus, lysosomes, mitochondria and plastids. They are important because they carry out some very crucial functions in cells. 5.2.5 (i) ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM (ER) The endoplasmic r eticulum (ER) is a lar ge network of membrane-bound tubes and sheets. It looks like long tubules or round or oblong bags (vesicles). The ER membrane is similar in structure to the plasma membrane. There are two types of ER– rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER) and smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER). RER looks rough under a microscope because it has particles called ribosomes attached to its sur face. The ribosomes, which ar e pr esent in all active cells, are the sites of protein manufactur e. The manufactured proteins are then sent to various places in the cell depending on need, using the ER. The SER helps in the manufactur e of fat molecules, or lipids, important for cell function. Some of these proteins and lipids help in building the cell membrane. This pr ocess is known as membrane biogenesis. Some other pr oteins and lipids function as enzymes and hormones. Although the ER varies greatly in appearance in different cells, it always forms a network system. Q Fig. 5.5: Animal cell Thus, one function of the ER is to serve as channels for the transport of materials (especially pr oteins) between various regions of the cytoplasm or between the cytoplasm and the nucleus. The ER also functions as a cytoplasmic framework providing a sur face Reprint 2025-26
ay uestion 5.2.5 (i) ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM (ER) 1. Fill in he gaps in the tollowing The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is a large | table fMustrating differcuces network of membrane-bound tubes and | berween prokarvotic (and sheets. It looks like long tubules or round or a cukarvotic cclls. oblong hags (vesicles). The ER membrane is similar in structure to the plasma membrane. There are two types of ER- rough endoplasmic Seale. a Dales - reticulum (RER) and smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER). RER looks rough under a 1. Size : generally 1. Size: generally microscope because it has particles called small (1-10 um) large (5-100 pm) ribosomes attached to its surface. The lum = 10%m ribosomes, which are present in all active cells, are the sites of protein manufacture. 2. Nuclear region: — 2. Nuclear region: The manufactured proteins are then sent to well defined and various places in the cell depending on need, surrounded by a using the ER. The SER helps in the and known as_ nuclear membrane manufacture of fat molecules, or lipids, important for cell function. Some of these 3. Chromosome: 3. More than one proteins and lipids help in building the cell single chromosome membrane. This process is known as , membrane biogenesis. Some other proteins 4. Membrane-bound 4. and lipids function as enzymes and cell organelles hormones. Although the ER varies greatly in absent appearance in different cells, it always forms a network system. 5.2.5 CELI. ORGANELLES Golgi . appargtiiy, ihn , _ Every cell has a membrane around it to keep ea Ud rie Pas its own contents separate from the external i e : Nr 7 : - / e @e Centrale environment. Large and complex cells. Smooth — f \oy | e “ including cells from multicellular organisms. endoplasmic. g ff Ag se need a lot of chemical activities to support i Re ofa ‘% _-Lysosome their complicated structure and function. To Secleat- rj Pas NO keep these activities of different kinds ——- i G iB PY eB Ribosomes separate from each other, these cells use Hl Ht xs uM ~Mitochond:on membrane-bound little structures (or K® EP a a ‘organelles’) within themselves. This is one of See fy the features of the eukaryotic cells that Sucldas fi j reticulum distinguish them from prokaryotic cells. Some Se cee Cytoplisin of these organelles are visible only with an electron microscope. Fig. 5.5: Animal cell We have talked about the nucleus in a previous section. Some important examples Thus, one function of the ER is to serve as of cell organelles which we will discuss now Channels for the transport of materials are: endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus, — {especially proteins) between various regions lysosomes, mitochondria and plastids. They of the cytoplasm or between the cytoplasm are important because they carry out some — and the nucleus. The ER also functions as a very crucial functions in cells. cytoplasmic framework providing a surface Th, Puspasenta Use or Lire 55 Reprint 2025-26 :

[Page 8]
SCIENCE56 Camillo Golgi was born at Corteno near Brescia in 1843. He studied medicine at the University of Pavia. After graduating in 1865, he continued to work in Pavia at the Hospital of St. Matteo. At that time most of his investigations were concerned with the nervous system, In 1872 he accepted the post of Chief Medical Officer at the Hospital for the Chronically Sick at Abbiategrasso. He first started his investigations into the nervous system in a little kitchen of this hospital, which he had converted into a laboratory. However , the work of greatest importance, which Golgi carried out was a revolutionary method of staining individual nerve and cell structures. This method is referred to as the ‘black reaction’. This method uses a weak solution of silver nitrate and is particularly valuable in tracing the processes and most delicate ramifications of cells. All through his life, he continued to work on these lines, modifying and improving this technique. Golgi received the highest honours and awards in recognition of his work. He shared the Nobel prize in 1906 with Santiago Ramony Cajal for their work on the structure of the nervous system. 5.2.5 (iii) LYSOSOMES Structurally, lysosomes are membrane-bound sacs filled with digestive enzymes. These enzymes are made by RER. Lysosomes ar e a kind of waste disposal system of the cell. These help to keep the cell clean by digesting any foreign material as well as worn-out cell organelles. Foreign materials entering the cell, such as bacteria or food, as well as old organelles end up in the lysosomes, which break complex substances into simpler substances. L ysosomes are able to do this because they contain powerful digestive enzymes capable of breaking down all organic material. During the disturbance in cellular metabolism, for example, when the cell gets Fig. 5.6: Plant cell for some of the biochemical activities of the cell. In the liver cells of the group of animals called vertebrates (see Chapter 7), SER plays a crucial role in detoxifying many poisons and drugs. 5.2.5 (ii) GOLGI APPARATUS The Golgi apparatus, first described by Camillo Golgi, consists of a system of membrane-bound vesicles (flattened sacs) arranged approximately parallel to each other in stacks called cisterns. These membranes often have connections with the membranes of ER and therefore constitute another portion of a complex cellular membrane system. The material synthesised near the ER is packaged and dispatched to various tar gets inside and outside the cell through the Golgi apparatus. Its functions include the storage, modification and packaging of pr oducts in vesicles. In some cases, complex sugars may be made from simple sugars in the Golgi apparatus. The Golgi apparatus is also involved in the formation of lysosomes [see 5.2.5 (iii)]. Reprint 2025-26
for some of the biochemical activities of the Camillo Golgi was born at cell. In the liver cells of the group of animals Corteno heer Brescia in called vertebrates (see Chapter 7), SER plays 1843 lle studied a crucial role in detoxifying many poisons - , . . a medicine at the University and drugs. of Pavia. After graduating 4 in 1865, he continued to at Rough endoplasmic work in Pavia at the . reticulum Hospital of St. Matteo. At Lysonome ! that time most of his Smooth H va investigations were endoplasmic EY? cmoroptast concerned with the nervous system, In 1872 ~e Pe he accepted the post of Chief Medical Officer EE ) Nucleus at the Hospital for the Chronically Sick at “2 fi be Abbiategrasso. He first started his ( S KA y Golsi ; investigations into the nervous system in a Px WY aa a little kitchen of this hospital, which he had | mn Yl <d i] envelope converted into a laboratory. However. the \ ( \ i Plasma ; work of greatest importance, which Golgt \ ° membrane . Os ee) carried out was a revolutionary method of SS Sy Adjacent staining individual nerve and cell structures. os we \ coh wa wall This method is referred to as the ‘black PS Mitochundrian reaction’. This method uses a weak solution £ \\ Ribosomes of silver nitrate and is particularly valuable Cxtopiasm / in tracing the processes and most delicate Chloroplast ramifications of cells. All through his life, he continued to work on these lines, modifying and improving this technique. Pig. 5.6: Plant cell Golgi received the highest honours and awards in recognition of his work. He shared oe the Nobel prize in 1906 with Santiago 5.2.5 (ii) GOLGI APPARATUS Ramony Cajal for their work on the structure The Golgi apparatus, first described by ofthe nervous system. Camillo Golgi. consists of a system of membrane-bound vesicles (flattened sacs) 5.2.5 (iii) LYSOSOMES arranged approximately parallel to each other in stacks called cisterns. These membranes Structurally. lysosomes are membrane-bound often have connections with the membranes —$ac¢s filled with digestive enzymes. These of ER and therefore constitute another portion — zymes are made by RER. Lysosomes are a ofa complex cellular membrane system. kind of waste disposal system of the cell. These The material synthesised near the ER is help to keep the cell clean by digesting any packaged and dispatched to various targets tore material as well lee eo vsthe cl inside and outside the cell through the Golgi organelles. Foreign materials entering the cell, " such as bacteria or food, as well as old apparatus. Its functions include the storage, organelles end up in the lysosomes. which modification and packaging of products in peek complex substances ‘into simpler vesicles. In some cases, complex sugars May syhstances. Lysosomes are able to do this be made from simple sugars in the Golgi beeause they contain powerful digestive apparatus. The Golgi apparatus is also enzymes capable of breaking down all organic involved in the formation of lysosomes [see material. During the disturbance in cellular 5.2.5 (iii)]. metabolism, for example. when the cell gets 56 Science. : Reprint 2025-26