[Page 5]
THE FUNDAMENTAL UNIT OF LIFE 53 Activity ______________ 5.5 • Find out about electron microscopes from resources in the school library or through the inter net. Discuss it with your teacher. uestions 1. How do substances like CO2 and water move in and out of the cell? Discuss. 2. Why is the plasma membrane called a selectively per meable membrane? 5.2.2 CELL WALL Plant cells, in addition to the plasma membrane, have another rigid outer covering called the cell wall. The cell wall lies outside the plasma membrane. The plant cell wall is mainly composed of cellulose. Cellulose is a complex substance and provides structural strength to plants. When a living plant cell loses water thr ough osmosis ther e is shrinkage or contraction of the contents of the cell away from the cell wall. This phenomenon is known as plasmolysis. W e can observe this phenomenon by per forming the following activity: Activity ______________ 5.6 • Mount the peel of a Rhoeo leaf in water on a slide and examine cells under the high power of a microscope. Note the small green granules, called chlor oplasts. They contain a gr een substance called chlor ophyll. Put a strong solution of sugar or salt on the mounted leaf on the slide. W ait for a minute and observe under a microscope. What do we see? • Now place some Rhoeo leaves in boiling water for a few minutes. This kills the cells. Then mount one leaf on a slide and observe it under a microscope. Put a strong solution of sugar or salt on the mounted leaf on the slide. Wait for a minute and observe it again. What do we find? Did plasmolysis occur now? What do we infer from this activity? It appears that only living cells, and not dead cells, are able to absorb water by osmosis. Cell walls permit the cells of plants, fungi and bacteria to withstand very dilute (hypotonic) external media without bursting. In such media the cells tend to take up water by osmosis. The cell swells, building up pressure against the cell wall. The wall exerts an equal pr essure against the swollen cell. Because of their walls, such cells can withstand much gr eater changes in the surrounding medium than animal cells. 5.2.3 NUCLEUS Remember the temporary mount of onion peel we prepared? We had put iodine solution on the peel. Why? What would we see if we tried observing the peel without putting the iodine solution? Try it and see what the dif ference is. Further, when we put iodine solution on the peel, did each cell get evenly coloured? According to their chemical composition dif fer ent r egions of cells get colour ed differentially. Some r egions appear darker than other regions. Apart from iodine solution we could also use safranin solution or methylene blue solution to stain the cells. We have observed cells from an onion; let us now observe cells from our own body. Activity ______________ 5.7 • Let us take a glass slide with a drop of water on it. Using an ice-cream spoon gently scrape the inside surface of the cheek. Does any material get stuck on the spoon? W ith the help of a needle we can transfer this material and spread it evenly on the glass slide kept ready for this. T o colour the material we can put a dr op of methylene blue solution on it. Now the material is ready for observation under microscope. Do not forget to put a cover-slip on it! • What do we observe? What is the shape of the cells we see? Draw it on the observation sheet. Q Reprint 2025-26
Activity 5.5 What do we infer from this activity? It appears that only living cells. and not dead ¢ Find out about cern thence on cells, are able to absorb water by osmosis. from re Sources in (he school library or Cell walls permit the cells of plants, fungi through the internet. Discuss it with your teacher. and bacteria to withstand very dilute . (hypotonic) external media without bursting. he . s . ry a e cells yt rs vater A) ueshions In such me dia the cells tend to take up water | by osmosis. The cell swells, building up | 1.) How do substances like CO and pressure against the cell wall. The wall exerts Water move in and out of the ecll? an equal pressure against the swollen cell. > es he pl ; Because of their walls. such cells can \U 2. wy is the plasma nicmbranc withstand much greater changes in the called a selectively permeable . ° ee surrounding medium than animal cells. menibranc, 5.2.3, NUCLEUS 5.2.2 CELL WALL : Remember the temporary mount of onion peel Plant cells, in addition to the plasma we prepared’? We had put iodine solution on membrane. have another nee ore coven the peel. Why? What would we see if we tried called the cell wail. The we wall les outside observing the peel without putting the iodine the plasma membrane. The plant cell wall is op oer . , solution? Try it and see what the difference mainly composed of cellulose. Cellulose is a . ° ae ae . is. Further, when we put iodine solution on complex substance and provides structural tt | did h cell get \ 1 1? e pee ach ¢ et evenly ¢ re strength to plants. he peel, did each cell get evenly coloured? When a living plant cell loses water According to their chemical composition through osmosis there is shrinkage or different regions of cells get coloured contraction of the contents of the cell away differentially. Some regions appear darker from the cell wall. This phenomenon is known __ than other regions. Apart from iodine solution as plasmolysis. We can observe this we could also use safranin solution or phenomenon by performing the following — methylene blue solution to stain the cells. activity: We have observed cells from an onion: let ary us now observe cells from our own body. Activity 5.6 , . Mount the peel of a Rhoco leaf in water Activity 5.7 on a slide and examine cells under the high power of a microscope. Note . Let us take a glass slide with a drop of the small green granules, called water on it. Using an ice-cream spoon chloroplasts. They contain a green gently scrape the inside surface of the substance called chlorophyll, Put a cheek. Does any material get stuck on strong solution of sugar or salt on the the spoon? With the help of a needle mounted leaf on the slide. Wait for a we can transfer this material and minute and observe under a spread it evenly on the glass slide kept MICTOSCOPE. What do we seed . ready for this. To colour the material . Now place some Rhoeo leaves in boiling - . . , . Mate le; we can put a drop of methylene blue water for a few minutes. This kills the . . a cells. ‘Then mount one leaf on a slide solution on it. Now the material is ready and observe it under a microscope. Put for observation under microscope. Do a strong solution of sugar or salt on not forget to put a cover-slip on it the mounted leaf on the shde. Wait for * What do we observe? What is the a minute and observe it again. What shape of the cells we see? Draw it on do we find? Did plasmolysis occur now? the observation sheet. Th, Puspasenta Use or Lire 53. Reprint 2025-26

[Page 6]
SCIENCE54 • Was there a darkly coloured, spherical or oval, dot-like structure near the centre of each cell? This structure is called nucleus. W ere ther e similar structures in onion peel cells? The nucleus has a double layered covering called nuclear membrane. The nuclear membrane has pores which allow the transfer of material fr om inside the nucleus to its outside, that is, to the cytoplasm (which we will talk about in section 5.2.4). The nucleus contains chr omosomes, which are visible as r od-shaped structur es only when the cell is about to divide. Chr omosomes contain infor mation for inheritance of characters from parents to next generation in the for m of DNA (Deoxyribo Nucleic Acid) molecules. Chr omosomes are composed of DNA and protein. DNA molecules contain the infor mation necessary for constructing and organising cells. Functional segments of DNA are called genes. In a cell which is not dividing, this DNA is present as part of chr omatin material. Chromatin material is visible as entangled mass of thread like structures. Whenever the cell is about to divide, the chromatin material gets organised into chromosomes. The nucleus plays a central role in cellular reproduction, the process by which a single cell divides and for ms two new cells. It also plays a crucial part, along with the environment, in determining the way the cell will develop and what for m it will exhibit at maturity, by directing the chemical activities of the cell. In some or ganisms like bacteria, the nuclear r egion of the cell may be poorly defined due to the absence of a nuclear membrane. Such an undefined nuclear region containing only nucleic acids is called a nucleoid. Such organisms, whose cells lack a nuclear membrane, are called prokaryotes (Pro = primitive or primary; karyote ≈ karyon = nucleus). Or ganisms with cells having a nuclear membrane are called eukaryotes. Prokaryotic cells (see Fig. 5.4) also lack most of the other cytoplasmic organelles present in eukaryotic cells. Many of the functions of such organelles are also performed by poorly or ganised parts of the cytoplasm (see section 5.2.4). The chlorophyll in photosynthetic pr okaryotic bacteria is associated with membranous vesicles (bag like structures) but not with plastids as in eukaryotic cells (see section 5.2.5). RibosomesPlasma membrane Cell wall Nucleoid Fig. 5.4: Prokaryotic cell 5.2.4 CYTOPLASM When we look at the temporary mounts of onion peel as well as human cheek cells, we can see a lar ge region of each cell enclosed by the cell membrane. This r egion takes up very little stain. It is called the cytoplasm. The cytoplasm is the fluid content inside the plasma membrane. It also contains many specialised cell or ganelles. Each of these organelles performs a specific function for the cell. Cell or ganelles ar e enclosed by membranes. In pr okaryotes, beside the absence of a defined nuclear r egion, the membrane-bound cell or ganelles ar e also absent. On the other hand, the eukaryotic cells have nuclear membrane as well as membrane-enclosed or ganelles. The significance of membranes can be illustrated with the example of viruses. Viruses lack any membranes and hence do not show characteristics of life until they enter a living body and use its cell machinery to multiply. Reprint 2025-26
e = Was there a darkly coloured, spherical present in eukaryotic cells. Many of the or oval, dot-like structure near the functions of such organelles are also centre of each cell? This structure is performed by poorly organised parts of the called nucleus. Were there similar cytoplasm (see section 5.2.4). The chlorophyll structures in onion peel cells? in photosynthetic prokaryotic bacteria is The nucleus has a double layered covering — associated with membranous vesicles (bag called nuclear membrane. The nuclear — like structures) but not with plastids as in membrane has pores which allow the transfer eukaryotic cells (see section 5.2.5). of material from inside the nucleus to its outside, that is, to the cytoplasm (which we will talk about in section 5.2.4). Plasma Ribosomes The nucleus contains chromosomes, tnembrane \ te, which are visible as rod-shaped structures \ Oo > only when the cell is about to divide. Cell wall 8 7 ee : r Chromosomes contain information for NYO . nary inheritance of characters from parents to next on Se Nuclead generation in the form of DNA (Deoxyribo a2* ye Nucleic Acid) molecules. Chromosomes are ~ composed of DNA and protein. DNA molecules contain the information necessary for constructing and organising cells. Functional Fig. 5.4: Prokaryotic cell segments of DNA are called genes. In a cell which is not dividing, this DNA is present as a . part of chromatin material. Chromatin 5.2.4 CYTOPLASM material is visible as entangled mass of thread like structures. Whenever the cell is about to When we look at the temporary mounts of divide. the chromatin material gets organised OM#ON peel as well as human cheek cells, we into chromosomes. , j can see a large region of each cell enclosed The nucleus plays a central role in cellular — by the cell membrane. This region takes up reproduction, the process by which a single Very little stain. It is called the cytoplasm. cell divides and forms two new cells. It also The cytoplasm is the fluid content inside the plays a crucial part, along with the plasma membrane. It also contains many environment, in determining the way the cell specialised cell organelles. Each of these will develop and what form it will exhibit at. OT8anelles performs a specific function for the maturity, by directing the chemical activities cell. of the cell. Cell organelles are enclosed by In some organisms like bacteria, the © Membranes. In prokaryotes, beside the nuclear region of the cell may be poorly absence of a defined nuclear region, the defined due to the absence of a nuclear Membrane-bound cell organelles are also membrane. Such an undefined nuclear region — absent. On the other hand. the eukaryotic containing only nucleic acids is called a cells have nuclear membrane as well as nucleoid. Such organisms, whose cells lack — membrane-enclosed organelles. a nuclear membrane, are called prokaryotes The significance of membranes can be (Pro = primitive or primary; karyote = karyon illustrated with the example of viruses. = nucleus). Organisms with cells having a Viruses lack any membranes and hence do nuclear membrane are called eukaryotes. not show characteristics of life until they enter Prokaryotic cells (see Fig. 5.4) also lack — a living body and use its cell machinery to most of the other cytoplasmic organelles — multiply. 54 Science. : Reprint 2025-26