[Page 1]
While examining a thin slice of cork, Robert Hooke saw that the cork r esembled the structure of a honeycomb consisting of many little compartments. Cork is a substance which comes fr om the bark of a tr ee. This was in the year 1665 when Hooke made this chance observation through a self-designed microscope. Robert Hooke called these boxes cells. Cell is a Latin word for ‘a little room’. This may seem to be a very small and insignificant incident but it is very important in the history of science. This was the very first time that someone had observed that living things appear to consist of separate units. The use of the word ‘cell’ to describe these units is being used till this day in biology. Let us find out about cells. 5.1 What are Living Organisms Made Up of? Activity ______________ 5.1 • Let us take a small piece from an onion bulb. With the help of a pair of forceps, we can peel of f the skin (called epidermis) from the concave side (inner layer) of the onion. This layer can be put immediately in a watch-glass containing water. This will prevent the peel from getting folded or getting dry. What do we do with this peel? • Let us take a glass slide, put a drop of water on it and transfer a small piece of the peel from the watch glass to the slide. Make sur e that the peel is perfectly flat on the slide. A thin camel hair paintbrush might be necessary to help transfer the peel. Now we put a drop of safranin solution on this piece followed by a cover slip. Take care to avoid air bubbles while putting the cover slip with the help of a mounting needle. Ask your teacher for help. W e have prepared a temporary mount of onion peel. We can observe this slide under low power followed by high powers of a compound microscope. Fig. 5.1: Compound microscope What do we observe as we look through the lens? Can we draw the structur es that we are able to see thr ough the micr oscope, on an observation sheet? Does it look like Fig. 5.2? Eyepiece Coarse adjustment Fine adjustment Arm Objective lens Stage Swivel Mirror Base Body tube Clip Microscope slide Condenser Fig. 5.2: Cells of an onion peel 5 T TT TTHE HEHE HEHE F F F F FUNDAMENTALUNDAMENTALUNDAMENTALUNDAMENTALUNDAMENTAL U U U U UNIT NITNIT NITNIT OF OFOF OFOF L L L L LIFE IFEIFE IFEIFE C hapter Nucleus Cells Reprint 2025-26
me C hapter 5 THE FUNDAMENTAL UNIT oF LIFE While examining a thin slice of cork, Robert avoid air bubbles while putting the Hooke saw that the cork resembled the cover slip with the help of a mounting structure of a honeycomb consisting of many needle. Ask your teacher tor help. We little compartments. Cork is a substance onion peed We a emp ory Haan which comes from the bark of a tree. This under low power followed by high was in the year 1665 when Hooke made this powers of a compound microscope. chance observation through a self-designed microscope. Robert Hooke called these boxes LY eyemece cells. Cell is a Latin word for ‘a little room’. it . This may seem to be a very small and L insignificant incident but it is very important ‘| f: ho in the history of science. This was the very first Body tube «| Gi Coarse adjustinent time that someone had observed that living , iI | C2 vine aa . things appear to consist of separate units. The _ i nd he adjustarennt use of the word ‘cell’ to describe these units is cp : Object lens being used tll this day in biology. Microscope elle . gil: ee Let us find out about cells. ee Stage ; — ct G swivel Condenser “Ai 5.1 What are Living Organisms Fe Mime Made Up of? we Be Activity 5, 1 Pig. 5.1: Compound microscope ¢ Let us take a small piece from an onion What do we observe as we look through bulb. With the help ofa pair of forceps, the lens? Can we draw the structures that we can peel off the skin (called cee . . veers epidermis) from the concave side (inner we are able to see through the microscope, laver) of the onion. This layer can be on an observation sheet? Does it look like put immediately in a watch-glass Fig. 5.2? containing water. This will prevent the = rel rom geuing tla or seine dry. nani . 0 What do we do with this peel? ~~ KY ~ ¢ Let us take a glass slide. put a drop of Papeete EL Nucleus water on it and transfer a small piece - > of the peel from the watch glass to the Se Cells slide. Make sure that the peel is °° gnc <> perfectly flat on the slide. A thin camel . x hair paintbrush might he necessary to ae whe help transfer the peel. Now we put a 7 ” drop of safranin solution on this piece followed by a cover slip. Take care to Fig. 5.2: Cells ofan onion peel Reprint 2025-26

[Page 2]
SCIENCE50 Chlamydomonas, Paramoecium and bacteria. These or ganisms ar e called unicellular organisms (uni = single). On the other hand, many cells gr oup together in a single body and assume different functions in it to for m various body parts in multicellular organisms (multi = many) such as some fungi, plants and animals. Can we find out names of some more unicellular organisms? Every multi-cellular or ganism has come from a single cell. How? Cells divide to produce cells of their own kind. All cells thus come from pre-existing cells. Activity ______________ 5.2 • We can try pr eparing temporary mounts of leaf peels, tip of r oots of onion or even peels of onions of different sizes. • After performing the above activity, let us see what the answers to the following questions would be: (a) Do all cells look alike in ter ms of shape and size? (b) Do all cells look alike in structure? (c) Could we find dif ferences among cells from different parts of a plant body? (d) What similarities could we find? Some or ganisms can also have cells of different kinds. Look at the following picture. It depicts some cells from the human body. Sperm Bone cell Smooth muscle cell Blood cells Ovum Fig. 5.3: Various cells from the human body More to know We can try preparing temporary mounts of peels of onions of different sizes. What do we observe? Do we see similar structures or different structures? What are these structures? These structures look similar to each other. Together they for m a big structure like an onion bulb! W e find fr om this activity that onion bulbs of dif ferent sizes have similar small structures visible under a microscope. The cells of the onion peel will all look the same, regardless of the size of the onion they came from. These small structures that we see ar e the basic building units of the onion bulb. These structur es ar e called cells. Not only onions, but all or ganisms that we observe around are made up of cells. However, there are also single cells that live on their own. Cells wer e first discover ed by Robert Hooke in 1665. He observed the cells in a cork slice with the help of a primitive micr oscope. Leeuwenhoek (1674), with the improved microscope, discovered the free living cells in pond water for the first time. It was Robert Br own in 1831 who discovered the nucleus in the cell. Purkinje in 1839 coined the ter m ‘pr otoplasm’ for the fluid substance of the cell. The cell theory, that all the plants and animals are composed of cells and that the cell is the basic unit of life, was pr esented by two biologists, Schleiden (1838) and Schwann (1839). The cell theory was further expanded by V irchow (1855) by suggesting that all cells arise from pre-existing cells. With the discovery of the electron microscope in 1940, it was possible to observe and understand the complex structure of the cell and its various organelles. The invention of magnifying lenses led to the discovery of the micr oscopic world. It is now known that a single cell may constitute a whole or ganism as in Amoeba, Nerve Cell Fat cell Reprint 2025-26
We can try preparing temporary mounts — Chlamydomonas, Paramoeciumand bacteria. of peels of onions of different sizes. What do These organisms are called unicellular we observe? Do we see similar structures or — organisms (uni = single). On the other hand, different structures? many cells group together in a single body What are these structures? and assume different functions in it to form various body parts in multicellular organisms These structures look similar to each other. {multi = many) such as some fungi, plants Together they form a big structure like an and animals. Can we find out names of some onion bulb! We find from this activity that = more unicellular organisms? onion bulbs of different sizes have similar Every multi-cellular organism has come small structures visible under a microscope. from a single cell. How? Cells divide to The cells of the onion peel will all look the — produce cells of their own kind. All cells thus same, regardless of the size of the onion they — come from pre-existing cells. came from. . These small structures that we see are Activity 5.2 the basic building units of the onion bulb. Thece « _ . ° We can try preparing temporary These structures are called cells. Not only , eo : - mounts of leaf peels, tip of roots of onions, but all organisms that we observe onion or even peels of omuons of different around are made up of cells. However, there sizes. are also single cells that live on their own. . After performing the above activity, let us see what the answers to the following Cells were first discovered by questions would be: Robert Hooke in 1665. He observed {a} Do all cells look alike in terms of the cells in a cork slice with the help shape and size? - > of a primitive microscope. th} Do all cells look alike in Structure? . (c) Could we find differences among Leeuwenhoek (1674), with the cells from different parts of a improved microscope. discovered the plant bedy? free living cells in pond water for the {d) What similarities could we find? first time. It was Robert Brown in Some organisms can also have cells of 2 1831 who discovered the nucleus in different kinds Look at the followin S pi t re. ee the cell. Purkinje in 1839 coined the 8. a 8 picture. = term ‘protoplasm’ for the fluid It depicts some cells from the human body. ° substance of the cell. The cell theory, ran hea that all the plants and animals are t . £ composed of cells and that the cell is oY LZ s the basic unit of life, was presented \ @ @ y; by two biologists, Schleiden (1838) . (ed : \ and Schwann (1839). The cell theory \ @ was further expanded by Virchow 4A Blood \ (1855) by suggesting that all cells _ cells Kerve Cell AN arise from pre-existing cells. With the Snooth \ discovery of the electron microscope cell . in 1940, it was possible to observe and Noy COOTER ." understand the complex structure of mee { A the cell and its various organelles. Bone tell 4 Fat cell The invention of magnifying lenses led to . NM A the discovery of the microscopic world. It is ovum aes now known that a single cell may constitute Sper a whole organism as in Amoeba, Fig. 5.3: Various cells from the human body 50 Science. : Reprint 2025-26