[Page 3]
THE FUNDAMENTAL UNIT OF LIFE 51 The shape and size of cells are related to the specific function they perform. Some cells like Amoeba have changing shapes. In some cases the cell shape could be mor e or less fixed and peculiar for a particular type of cell; for example, nerve cells have a typical shape. Each living cell has the capacity to perform certain basic functions that ar e characteristic of all living for ms. How does a living cell per form these basic functions? We know that there is a division of labour in multicellular or ganisms such as human beings. This means that dif ferent parts of the human body perform different functions. The human body has a heart to pump blood, a stomach to digest food and so on. Similarly, division of labour is also seen within a single cell. In fact, each such cell has got certain specific components within it known as cell organelles. Each kind of cell or ganelle performs a special function, such as making new material in the cell, clearing up the waste material fr om the cell and so on. A cell is able to live and per for m all its functions because of these organelles. These organelles together constitute the basic unit called the cell. It is inter esting that all cells are found to have the same or ganelles, no matter what their function is or what organism they are found in. uestions 1. Who discovered cells, and how? 2. Why is the cell called the structural and functional unit of life? 5.2 What is a Cell Made Up of? What is the Structural Organisation of a Cell? We saw above that the cell has special components called organelles. How is a cell organised? If we study a cell under a microscope, we would come across three features in almost every cell; plasma membrane, nucleus and cytoplasm. All activities inside the cell and interactions of the cell with its envir onment are possible due to these features. Let us see how. 5.2.1 PLASMA MEMBRANE OR CELL MEMBRANE This is the outermost covering of the cell that separates the contents of the cell fr om its external environment. The plasma membrane allows or permits the entry and exit of some materials in and out of the cell. It also prevents movement of some other materials. The cell membrane, ther efore, is called a selectively permeable membrane. How does the movement of substances take place into the cell? How do substances move out of the cell? Some substances like carbon dioxide or oxygen can move acr oss the cell membrane by a process called diffusion. We have studied the process of dif fusion in earlier chapters. We saw that there is spontaneous movement of a substance fr om a r egion of high concentration to a r egion wher e its concentration is low. Something similar to this happens in cells when, for example, some substance like CO2 (which is cellular waste and r equires to be excreted out by the cell) accumulates in high concentrations inside the cell. In the cell’s external environment, the concentration of CO2 is low as compar ed to that inside the cell. As soon as ther e is a dif ference of concentration of CO2 inside and outside a cell, CO2 moves out of the cell, fr om a r egion of high concentration, to a r egion of low concentration outside the cell by the process of diffusion. Similarly, O 2 enters the cell by the pr ocess of dif fusion when the level or concentration of O2 inside the cell decreases. Thus, dif fusion plays an important r ole in gaseous exchange between the cells as well as the cell and its external environment. Water also obeys the law of diffusion. The movement of water molecules through such a selectively permeable membrane is called osmosis. Q Reprint 2025-26
The shape and size of cells are related to every cell: plasma membrane, nucleus and the specific function they perform. Some cells cytoplasm. All activities inside the cell and like Amoeba have changing shapes. In some interactions of the cell with its environment cases the cell shape could be more or less — are possible due to these features. Let us see fixed and peculiar fora particular type of cell: how. for example, nerve cells have a typical shape. Each living cell has the capacity to 5.2.1 PLASMA MEMBRANE OR CELL perform certain basic functions that are MEMBRANE characteristic of all living forms. How does ~~ “— a living cell perform these basic functions? This is the outermost covering of the cell that We know that there is a division of labour in separates the contents of the cell from its multicellular organisms such as human — external environment. The plasma membrane beings. This means that different parts of allows or permits the entry and exit of some the human hody perform different functions. — materials in and out of the cell. It also The human body has a heart to pump blood. prevents movement of some other materials. a stomach to digest food and so on. Similarly. The cell membrane, therefore, is called a division of labour is also seen within a single selectively permeable membrane. cell, In fact, each such cell has got certain How does the movement of substances specific components within it known as cell take place into the cell’? How do substances organelles. Each kind of cell organelle move out of the cell’? performs a special function, such as making Some substances like carbon dioxide or new material in the cell, clearing up the oxygen can move across the cell membrane waste material from the cell and so on. A bya process called diffusion. We have studied cell is able to live and perform all its the process of diffusion in earlier chapters. functions because of these organelles. These We saw that there is spontaneous movement organelles together constitute the basic unit of a substance from a region of high called the cell. It is interesting that all cells goneentration to a region where its are found to have the same organelles. nO gencentration is low. matter what their function is or what Something similar to this happens in cells organism they are found in. when. for example, some substance like CO, . {which is cellular waste and requires to be (1 westions excreted out by the cell) accumulates in high | 1. Who discovercd cells. and how? concentrations inside the cell. In the cell's 2 Why is the cell called the external environment, the concentration of saructuraland functional unit ot CO, Is low as compared to that inside the | life? cell. As soon as there is a difference of G concentration of CO, inside and outside a cell, i, CO, moves out of the cell. from a region of high concentration, to a region of low 5.2 What is a Cell Made Up of? concentration outside the cell by the process . of diffusion. Similarly, O, enters the cell by What is the Structural the process of diffusion when the level or Organisation of a Cell? concentration of o, inside the cell decreases, us, diffusion plays an important role in We saw above that the cell has special gaseous exchange between the cells as well components called organelles. How is a cell as the cell and its external environment. organised? Water also obeys the law of diffusion. The “Ifwe study a cell under a microscope. we movement of water molecules through such a would come across three features in almost selectively permeable membrane is called osmosis. Th, Puspasenta Use or Lire 51 Reprint 2025-26 :

[Page 4]
SCIENCE52 52525252 The movement of water across the plasma membrane is also affected by the amount of substance dissolved in water. Thus, osmosis is the net diffusion of water across a selectively permeable membrane toward a higher solute concentration. What will happen if we put an animal cell or a plant cell into a solution of sugar or salt in water? One of the following thr ee things could happen: 1. If the medium surrounding the cell has a higher water concentration than the cell, meaning that the outside solution is very dilute, the cell will gain water by osmosis. Such a solution is known as a hypotonic solution. Water molecules are free to pass across the cell membrane in both directions, but more water will come into the cell than will leave. The net (overall) result is that water enters the cell. The cell is likely to swell up. 2. If the medium has exactly the same water concentration as the cell, there will be no net movement of water across the cell membrane. Such a solution is known as an isotonic solution. Water crosses the cell membrane in both directions, but the amount going in is the same as the amount going out, so there is no overall movement of water. The cell will stay the same size. 3. If the medium has a lower concentration of water than the cell, meaning that it is a very concentrated solution, the cell will lose water by osmosis. Such a solution is known as a hypertonic solution. Again, water cr osses the cell membrane in both directions, but this time more water leaves the cell than enters it. Therefore the cell will shrink. Thus, osmosis is a special case of diffusion through a selectively permeable membrane. Now let us try out the following activity: Activity ______________ 5.3 (a) Remove the shell of an egg by dissolving it in dilute hydrochloric acid. The shell is mostly calcium carbonate. A thin outer skin now encloses the egg. Put the egg in pure water and observe after 5 minutes. What do we observe? The egg swells because water passes into it by osmosis. (b) Place a similar de-shelled egg in a concentrated salt solution and observe for 5 minutes. The egg shrinks. Why? Water passes out of the egg solution into the salt solution because the salt solution is more concentrated. We can also try a similar activity with dried raisins or apricots. Activity ______________ 5.4 • Put dried raisins or apricots in plain water and leave them for some time. Then place them into a concentrated solution of sugar or salt. Y ou will observe the following: (a) Each gains water and swells when placed in water . (b) However , when placed in the concentrated solution it loses water, and consequently shrinks. Unicellular freshwater organisms and most plant cells tend to gain water thr ough osmosis. Absorption of water by plant r oots is also an example of osmosis. Thus, diffusion is important in exhange of gases and water in the life of a cell. In additions to this, the cell also obtains nutrition fr om its envir onment. Dif ferent molecules move in and out of the cell through a type of transport r equiring use of energy. The plasma membrane is flexible and is made up of or ganic molecules called lipids and proteins. However, we can observe the structur e of the plasma membrane only through an electr on microscope. The flexibility of the cell membrane also enables the cell to engulf in food and other material from its external environment. Such processes are known as endocytosis. Amoeba acquires its food through such processes. Reprint 2025-26
The movement of water across the plasma Activity 5.3 membrane is also affected by the TTT amount of substance dissolved in water. Thus, {a} Remove the shell of an egg by osmosis is the net diffusion of water across a dissolving it in dilute hydrochloric selectively permeable membrane toward a acid. The shell is mostly caleium earbonate. A thin outer skin now higher solute concentration, encloses the egg, Put the egg in pure What will happen if we put an animal cell water and observe after 5 minutes. or a plant cell into a solution of sugar or salt What do we observe? in water? The epg swells because water passes One of the following three things could into it by osmosis. happen: (bh) Place a similar de-shelled egg in a concentrated salt solution and ohserve 1. Ifthe medium surrounding the cell has = oe on - ne - - for 5 minutes. The egg shrinks. Why? a higher water concentration than the Water passes out of the egg solution cell, meaning that the outside solution into the salt solution because the salt is very dilute. the cell will gain water by solution 1s more concentrated. osmosis. Such a solution is known as We can also try a similar activity with dried a hypotonic solution. raisins or apricots. Water molecules are free to pass Activity 5.4 across the cell membrane in both TT directions, but more water will come ¢ Put dned raisins or apricots in plain into the cell than will leave. The net water and leave them for some time. Then place them into a concentrated (overall) result is that water enters the solution of sugar or salt. You will cell. The cell is likely to swell up. observe the following: 2. If the medium has exactly the same (a) Each gains water and swells water concentration as the cell. there when placed in water, - (b) However, when placed in the will be no net movement of water across concentrated solution it loses the cell membrane. Such a solution is water, and consequently shrinks. known as an isotonic solution, Unicellular freshwater organisms and Water crosses the cell membrane in most plant cells tend to gain water through both directions, but the amount going — osmosis. Absorption of water by plant roots in is the same as the amount going out, —_ 1 also an example of osmosis. so there is no overall movement of Thus, diffusion is important in exhange water. The cell will stay the same size. of gases and water in the life of a cell. In ‘ , additions to this, the cell also obtains 3. If the medium has a lower nutrition from its environment. Different concentration of water than the cell, molecules move in and out of the cell meaning that it is a very concentrated — through a type of transport requiring use solution, the cell will lose water by — of energy. osmosis. Such a solution is known as The plasma membrane is flexible and is a hypertonic solution. made up of organic molecules called lipids Again. water crosses the cell and proteins. However, we can observe the Bain. . structure of the plasma membrane only membrane in both directions, but this . - through an electron microscope. lime more water leaves the cell than The flexibility of the cell membrane also enters it, Therefore the cell will shrink. enables the cell to engulf in food and other Thus, osmosis is a special case of diffusion material from its external environment. Such through a selectively permeable membrane. processes are known as endocytosis. Amoeba Now let us try out the following activity: acquires its food through such processes. 52 Sewer : Reprint 2025-26