[Page 4]
SCIENCE52 52525252 The movement of water across the plasma membrane is also affected by the amount of substance dissolved in water. Thus, osmosis is the net diffusion of water across a selectively permeable membrane toward a higher solute concentration. What will happen if we put an animal cell or a plant cell into a solution of sugar or salt in water? One of the following thr ee things could happen: 1. If the medium surrounding the cell has a higher water concentration than the cell, meaning that the outside solution is very dilute, the cell will gain water by osmosis. Such a solution is known as a hypotonic solution. Water molecules are free to pass across the cell membrane in both directions, but more water will come into the cell than will leave. The net (overall) result is that water enters the cell. The cell is likely to swell up. 2. If the medium has exactly the same water concentration as the cell, there will be no net movement of water across the cell membrane. Such a solution is known as an isotonic solution. Water crosses the cell membrane in both directions, but the amount going in is the same as the amount going out, so there is no overall movement of water. The cell will stay the same size. 3. If the medium has a lower concentration of water than the cell, meaning that it is a very concentrated solution, the cell will lose water by osmosis. Such a solution is known as a hypertonic solution. Again, water cr osses the cell membrane in both directions, but this time more water leaves the cell than enters it. Therefore the cell will shrink. Thus, osmosis is a special case of diffusion through a selectively permeable membrane. Now let us try out the following activity: Activity 5.3 (a) Remove the shell of an egg by dissolving it in dilute hydrochloric acid. The shell is mostly calcium carbonate. A thin outer skin now encloses the egg. Put the egg in pure water and observe after 5 minutes. What do we observe? The egg swells because water passes into it by osmosis. (b) Place a similar de-shelled egg in a concentrated salt solution and observe for 5 minutes. The egg shrinks. Why? Water passes out of the egg solution into the salt solution because the salt solution is more concentrated. We can also try a similar activity with dried raisins or apricots. Activity 5.4 • Put dried raisins or apricots in plain water and leave them for some time. Then place them into a concentrated solution of sugar or salt. Y ou will observe the following: (a) Each gains water and swells when placed in water . (b) However , when placed in the concentrated solution it loses water, and consequently shrinks. Unicellular freshwater organisms and most plant cells tend to gain water thr ough osmosis. Absorption of water by plant r oots is also an example of osmosis. Thus, diffusion is important in exhange of gases and water in the life of a cell. In additions to this, the cell also obtains nutrition fr om its envir onment. different molecules move in and out of the cell through a type of transport r equiring use of energy. The plasma membrane is flexible and is made up of or ganic molecules called lipids and proteins. However, we can observe the structur e of the plasma membrane only through an electr on microscope. The flexibility of the cell membrane also enables the cell to engulf in food and other material from its external environment. Such processes are known as endocytosis. Amoeba acquires its food through such processes.

[Page 5]
THE FUNDAMENTAL UNIT OF LIFE 53 Activity 5.5 • Find out about electron microscopes from resources in the school library or through the inter net. Discuss it with your teacher. uestions 1. How do substances like CO2 and water move in and out of the cell? Discuss. 2. Why is the plasma membrane called a selectively per meable membrane? 5.2.2 CELL WALL Plant cells, in addition to the plasma membrane, have another rigid outer covering called the cell wall. The cell wall lies outside the plasma membrane. The plant cell wall is mainly composed of cellulose. Cellulose is a complex substance and provides structural strength to plants. When a living plant cell loses water thr ough osmosis ther e is shrinkage or contraction of the contents of the cell away from the cell wall. This phenomenon is known as plasmolysis. W e can observe this phenomenon by per forming the following activity: Activity 5.6 • Mount the peel of a Rhoeo leaf in water on a slide and examine cells under the high power of a microscope. Note the small green granules, called chlor oplasts. They contain a gr een substance called chlor ophyll. Put a strong solution of sugar or salt on the mounted leaf on the slide. W ait for a minute and observe under a microscope. What do we see? • Now place some Rhoeo leaves in boiling water for a few minutes. This kills the cells. Then mount one leaf on a slide and observe it under a microscope. Put a strong solution of sugar or salt on the mounted leaf on the slide. Wait for a minute and observe it again. What do we find? Did plasmolysis occur now? What do we infer from this activity? It appears that only living cells, and not dead cells, are able to absorb water by osmosis. Cell walls permit the cells of plants, fungi and bacteria to withstand very dilute (hypotonic) external media without bursting. In such media the cells tend to take up water by osmosis. The cell swells, building up pressure against the cell wall. The wall exerts an equal pr essure against the swollen cell. Because of their walls, such cells can withstand much greater changes in the surrounding medium than animal cells. 5.2.3 NUCLEUS Remember the temporary mount of onion peel we prepared? We had put iodine solution on the peel. Why? What would we see if we tried observing the peel without putting the iodine solution? Try it and see what the dif ference is. Further, when we put iodine solution on the peel, did each cell get evenly coloured? According to their chemical composition dif fer ent r egions of cells get colour ed differentially. Some r egions appear darker than other regions. Apart from iodine solution we could also use safranin solution or methylene blue solution to stain the cells. We have observed cells from an onion; let us now observe cells from our own body. Activity 5.7 • Let us take a glass slide with a drop of water on it. Using an ice-cream spoon gently scrape the inside surface of the cheek. Does any material get stuck on the spoon? W ith the help of a needle we can transfer this material and spread it evenly on the glass slide kept ready for this. T o colour the material we can put a drop of methylene blue solution on it. Now the material is ready for observation under microscope. Do not forget to put a cover-slip on it! • What do we observe? What is the shape of the cells we see? Draw it on the observation sheet. Q

[Page 6]
SCIENCE54 • Was there a darkly coloured, spherical or oval, dot-like structure near the centre of each cell? This structure is called nucleus. W ere ther e similar structures in onion peel cells? The nucleus has a double layered covering called nuclear membrane. The nuclear membrane has pores which allow the transfer of material fr om inside the nucleus to its outside, that is, to the cytoplasm (which we will talk about in section 5.2.4). The nucleus contains chr omosomes, which are visible as r od-shaped structur es only when the cell is about to divide. Chr omosomes contain infor mation for inheritance of characters from parents to next generation in the for m of DNA (Deoxyribo Nucleic Acid) molecules. Chr omosomes are composed of DNA and protein. DNA molecules contain the infor mation necessary for constructing and organising cells. Functional segments of DNA are called genes. In a cell which is not dividing, this DNA is present as part of chr omatin material. Chromatin material is visible as entangled mass of thread like structures. Whenever the cell is about to divide, the chromatin material gets organised into chromosomes. The nucleus plays a central role in cellular reproduction, the process by which a single cell divides and for ms two new cells. It also plays a crucial part, along with the environment, in determining the way the cell will develop and what for m it will exhibit at maturity, by directing the chemical activities of the cell. In some or ganisms like bacteria, the nuclear r egion of the cell may be poorly defined due to the absence of a nuclear membrane. Such an undefined nuclear region containing only nucleic acids is called a nucleoid. Such organisms, whose cells lack a nuclear membrane, are called prokaryotes (Pro = primitive or primary; karyote ≈ karyon = nucleus). Or ganisms with cells having a nuclear membrane are called eukaryotes. Prokaryotic cells (see Fig. 5.4) also lack most of the other cytoplasmic organelles present in eukaryotic cells. Many of the functions of such organelles are also performed by poorly or ganised parts of the cytoplasm (see section 5.2.4). The chlorophyll in photosynthetic pr okaryotic bacteria is associated with membranous vesicles (bag like structures) but not with plastids as in eukaryotic cells (see section 5.2.5). RibosomesPlasma membrane Cell wall Nucleoid Fig. 5.4: Prokaryotic cell 5.2.4 CYTOPLASM When we look at the temporary mounts of onion peel as well as human cheek cells, we can see a lar ge region of each cell enclosed by the cell membrane. This r egion takes up very little stain. It is called the cytoplasm. The cytoplasm is the fluid content inside the plasma membrane. It also contains many specialised cell or ganelles. Each of these organelles performs a specific function for the cell. Cell or ganelles ar e enclosed by membranes. In pr okaryotes, beside the absence of a defined nuclear r egion, the membrane-bound cell or ganelles ar e also absent. On the other hand, the eukaryotic cells have nuclear membrane as well as membrane-enclosed or ganelles. The significance of membranes can be illustrated with the example of viruses. Viruses lack any membranes and hence do not show characteristics of life until they enter a living body and use its cell machinery to multiply.