[Page 1]
While examining a thin slice of cork, Robert Hooke saw that the cork r esembled the structure of a honeycomb consisting of many little compartments. Cork is a substance which comes fr om the bark of a tr ee. This was in the year 1665 when Hooke made this chance observation through a self-designed microscope. Robert Hooke called these boxes cells. Cell is a Latin word for ‘a little room’. This may seem to be a very small and insignificant incident but it is very important in the history of science. This was the very first time that someone had observed that living things appear to consist of separate units. The use of the word ‘cell’ to describe these units is being used till this day in biology. Let us find out about cells. 5.1 What are Living Organisms Made Up of? Activity 5.1 • Let us take a small piece from an onion bulb. With the help of a pair of forceps, we can peel of f the skin (called epidermis) from the concave side (inner layer) of the onion. This layer can be put immediately in a watch-glass containing water. This will prevent the peel from getting folded or getting dry. What do we do with this peel? • Let us take a glass slide, put a drop of water on it and transfer a small piece of the peel from the watch glass to the slide. Make sur e that the peel is perfectly flat on the slide. A thin camel hair paintbrush might be necessary to help transfer the peel. Now we put a drop of safranin solution on this piece followed by a cover slip. Take care to avoid air bubbles while putting the cover slip with the help of a mounting needle. Ask your teacher for help. W e have prepared a temporary mount of onion peel. We can observe this slide under low power followed by high powers of a compound microscope. Fig. 5.1: Compound microscope What do we observe as we look through the lens? Can we draw the structur es that we are able to see thr ough the micr oscope, on an observation sheet? Does it look like Fig. 5.2? Eyepiece Coarse adjustment Fine adjustment Arm Objective lens Stage Swivel Mirror Base Body tube Clip Microscope slide Condenser Fig. 5.2: Cells of an onion peel 5 T TT TTHE HEHE HEHE F F F F FUNDAMENTALUNDAMENTALUNDAMENTALUNDAMENTALUNDAMENTAL U U U U UNIT NITNIT NITNIT OF OFOF OFOF L L L L LIFE IFEIFE IFEIFE C hapter Nucleus Cells

[Page 2]
SCIENCE50 Chlamydomonas, Paramoecium and bacteria. These or ganisms ar e called unicellular organisms (uni = single). On the other hand, many cells gr oup together in a single body and assume different functions in it to for m various body parts in multicellular organisms (multi = many) such as some fungi, plants and animals. Can we find out names of some more unicellular organisms? Every multi-cellular or ganism has come from a single cell. How? Cells divide to produce cells of their own kind. All cells thus come from pre-existing cells. Activity 5.2 • We can try pr eparing temporary mounts of leaf peels, tip of r oots of onion or even peels of onions of different sizes. • After performing the above activity, let us see what the answers to the following questions would be: (a) Do all cells look alike in ter ms of shape and size? (b) Do all cells look alike in structure? (c) Could we find dif ferences among cells from different parts of a plant body? (d) What similarities could we find? Some or ganisms can also have cells of different kinds. Look at the following picture. It depicts some cells from the human body. Sperm Bone cell Smooth muscle cell Blood cells Ovum Fig. 5.3: Various cells from the human body More to know We can try preparing temporary mounts of peels of onions of different sizes. What do we observe? Do we see similar structures or different structures? What are these structures? These structures look similar to each other. Together they for m a big structure like an onion bulb! W e find fr om this activity that onion bulbs of different sizes have similar small structures visible under a microscope. The cells of the onion peel will all look the same, regardless of the size of the onion they came from. These small structures that we see ar e the basic building units of the onion bulb. These structur es ar e called cells. Not only onions, but all or ganisms that we observe around are made up of cells. However, there are also single cells that live on their own. Cells wer e first discover ed by Robert Hooke in 1665. He observed the cells in a cork slice with the help of a primitive micr oscope. Leeuwenhoek (1674), with the improved microscope, discovered the free living cells in pond water for the first time. It was Robert Br own in 1831 who discovered the nucleus in the cell. Purkinje in 1839 coined the ter m ‘pr otoplasm’ for the fluid substance of the cell. The cell theory, that all the plants and animals are composed of cells and that the cell is the basic unit of life, was pr esented by two biologists, Schleiden (1838) and Schwann (1839). The cell theory was further expanded by V irchow (1855) by suggesting that all cells arise from pre-existing cells. With the discovery of the electron microscope in 1940, it was possible to observe and understand the complex structure of the cell and its various organelles. The invention of magnifying lenses led to the discovery of the micr oscopic world. It is now known that a single cell may constitute a whole or ganism as in Amoeba, Nerve Cell Fat cell

[Page 3]
THE FUNDAMENTAL UNIT OF LIFE 51 The shape and size of cells are related to the specific function they perform. Some cells like Amoeba have changing shapes. In some cases the cell shape could be mor e or less fixed and peculiar for a particular type of cell; for example, nerve cells have a typical shape. Each living cell has the capacity to perform certain basic functions that ar e characteristic of all living for ms. How does a living cell per form these basic functions? We know that there is a division of labour in multicellular or ganisms such as human beings. This means that different parts of the human body perform different functions. The human body has a heart to pump blood, a stomach to digest food and so on. Similarly, division of labour is also seen within a single cell. In fact, each such cell has got certain specific components within it known as cell organelles. Each kind of cell or ganelle performs a special function, such as making new material in the cell, clearing up the waste material fr om the cell and so on. A cell is able to live and per for m all its functions because of these organelles. These organelles together constitute the basic unit called the cell. It is inter esting that all cells are found to have the same or ganelles, no matter what their function is or what organism they are found in. uestions 1. Who discovered cells, and how? 2. Why is the cell called the structural and functional unit of life? 5.2 What is a Cell Made Up of? What is the Structural Organisation of a Cell? We saw above that the cell has special components called organelles. How is a cell organised? If we study a cell under a microscope, we would come across three features in almost every cell; plasma membrane, nucleus and cytoplasm. All activities inside the cell and interactions of the cell with its envir onment are possible due to these features. Let us see how. 5.2.1 PLASMA MEMBRANE OR CELL MEMBRANE This is the outermost covering of the cell that separates the contents of the cell fr om its external environment. The plasma membrane allows or permits the entry and exit of some materials in and out of the cell. It also prevents movement of some other materials. The cell membrane, ther efore, is called a selectively permeable membrane. How does the movement of substances take place into the cell? How do substances move out of the cell? Some substances like carbon dioxide or oxygen can move acr oss the cell membrane by a process called diffusion. We have studied the process of dif fusion in earlier chapters. We saw that there is spontaneous movement of a substance fr om a r egion of high concentration to a r egion wher e its concentration is low. Something similar to this happens in cells when, for example, some substance like CO2 (which is cellular waste and r equires to be excreted out by the cell) accumulates in high concentrations inside the cell. In the cell’s external environment, the concentration of CO2 is low as compar ed to that inside the cell. As soon as ther e is a dif ference of concentration of CO2 inside and outside a cell, CO2 moves out of the cell, fr om a r egion of high concentration, to a r egion of low concentration outside the cell by the process of diffusion. Similarly, O 2 enters the cell by the pr ocess of dif fusion when the level or concentration of O2 inside the cell decreases. Thus, dif fusion plays an important r ole in gaseous exchange between the cells as well as the cell and its external environment. Water also obeys the law of diffusion. The movement of water molecules through such a selectively permeable membrane is called osmosis. Q