[Page 9]
THE FUNDAMENTAL UNIT OF LIFE 57 57575757 damaged, lysosomes may burst and the enzymes digest their own cell. Therefore, lysosomes are also known as the ‘suicide bags’ of a cell. 5.2.5 (iv) MITOCHONDRIA Mitochondria are known as the powerhouses of the cell. Mitochondria have two membrane coverings. The outer membrane is porous while the inner membrane is deeply folded. These folds increase surface area for ATP- generating chemical reactions. The energy required for various chemical activities needed for life is released by mitochondria in the form of ATP (Adenosine triphosphate) molecules. ATP is known as the energy currency of the cell. The body uses energy stored in ATP for making new chemical compounds and for mechanical work. Mitochondria are strange organelles in the sense that they have their own DNA and ribosomes. Therefore, mitochondria are able to make some of their own proteins. 5.2.5 (V) PLASTIDS Plastids are present only in plant cells. There are two types of plastids – chromoplasts (coloured plastids) and leucoplasts (white or colourless plastids). Chromoplasts containing the pigment chlorophyll are known as chloroplasts. Chloroplasts are important for photosynthesis in plants. Chloroplasts also contain various yellow or orange pigments in addition to chlorophyll. Leucoplasts are primarily organelles in which materials such as starch, oils and protein granules are stored. The internal organisation of the Chloroplast consists of numerous membrane layers embedded in a material called the stroma. These are similar to mitochondria in external structure. Like the mitochondria, plastids also have their own DNA and ribosomes. 5.2.5 (vi) VACUOLES Vacuoles are storage sacs for solid or liquid contents. Vacuoles are small sized in animal cells while plant cells have very large vacuoles. The central vacuole of some plant cells may occupy 50-90% of the cell volume. In plant cells vacuoles are full of cell sap and provide turgidity and rigidity to the cell. Many substances of importance in the life of the plant cell are stored in vacuoles. These include amino acids, sugars, various organic acids and some proteins. In single-celled organisms like Amoeba, the food vacuole contains the food items that the Amoeba has consumed. In some unicellular organisms, specialised vacuoles also play important roles in expelling excess water and some wastes from the cell. uestions 1. Can you name the two organelles we have studied that contain their own genetic material? 2. If the organisation of a cell is destroyed due to some physical or chemical influence, what will happen? 3. Why are lysosomes known as suicide bags? 4. Where are proteins synthesised inside the cell? Each cell thus acquires its structure and ability to function because of the organisation of its membrane and organelles in specific ways. The cell thus has a basic structural organisation. This helps the cells to perform functions like respiration, obtaining nutrition, and clearing of waste material, or forming new proteins. Thus, the cell is the fundamental structural unit of living organisms. It is also the basic functional unit of life. Cell DivisionCell DivisionCell DivisionCell DivisionCell Division New cells are formed in organisms in order to grow, to replace old, dead and injured cells, and to form gametes required for reproduction. The process by which new cells are made is called cell division. There are two main types of cell division: mitosis and meiosis. The process of cell division by which most of the cells divide for growth is called mitosis. In this process, each cell called mother cell Q Reprint 2025-26
damaged, lysosomes may burst and the In plant cells vacuoles are full of cell sap enzyines digest their own cell. Therefore, and provide turgidity and rigidity to the cell. lysosomes are also known as the ‘suicide bags’ — Many substances of importance in the life of ofa cell. the plant cell are stored in vacuoles. These include amino acids, sugars, various organic 5.2.5 (iv) MItOoCHONDRIA acids and some proteins. In single-celled Mitochondria are known as the powerhouses organisms like Amoeba. the food vacuole of the cell. Mitochondria have two membrane contains the feod items that the Amoeba has coverings. The outer membrane is porous consumed, In some unicellular organisms, . aan ; . 1 , specialised vacuoles also play important roles while the inner membrane is deeply folded. in expelli surotpuecce canatpue Bet es 4 " in expelling excess water and some wastes These folds increase surface area for ATP- ft veel _— rom the cell, generating chemical reactions. The energy required for various chernical activities needed . for life is released by mitochondria in the form (" westious of ATP (Adenosine triphosphate) molecules. [| | | hee ame the two oreanelles ATP is known as the energy currency of the f. Can you name the two organelles cell. The body uses energy stored in ATP for we have studied that contain making new chemical compounds and for their own genetic material? mechanical work. | | 2. if the organisation of a cell is Mitochondria are strange organelles in the oO destroved due lo some physical sense that they have their own DNA and or chentical influence, What will ribosomes. Therefore, mitochondria are able happen? to make some of their own proteins. 3. Why are Ivsosomes Known as spapye suicide bags? 5.2.5 (v) PLastips 4, Where are proteins svnthesised Plastids are present only in plant cells. There inside the cell? are two types of plastids - chromoplasts (coloured plastids) and leucoplasts (white or Each cell thus acquires its structure and colourless plastids). Chromoplasts containing ability to function because of the organisation the pigment chlorophyll are known as of its membrane and organelles in specific chloroplasts. Chloroplasts are important fer Ways. The cell thus has a basic structural photosynthesis in plants. Chloroplasts also oTanisation. This helps the cells to perform contain various yellow or orange pigments in functions like respiration, obtaining nutrition, addition to chlorophyll. Lencoplasts are @0d clearing of waste material. or forming primarily organelles in which materials such = ew proteins. as starch, oils and protein grannies are stored. Thus, the cellis the fundamental structural ‘The internal organisation of the Chloroplast. Unit of living organisms. It is also the basic consists of numerous membrane layers — functional unit of life. embedded in a material called the stroma. These Cell: Division are similar to mitochondria in external | | structure. Like the mitochondria, plastids also New cells are fortned in organisms in order to have their own DNA and ribosomes. grow, to replace old, dead and injured cells, and to form gametes required for 5.2.5 (vi) VACUOLES reproduction. The process by which new cells are made is called cell division, There are two Vacuoles are storage sacs for solid or liquid main types of cell division: mitosis contents. Vacuoles are small sized in animal and meiosis. cells while plant cells have very large vacuoles. The process of cell division by which most The central vacuole of some plant cells may of the cells divide for growth is called mitosis. occupy 50-90% of the cell volume. In this process, cach cell called mother cell The Foxpamestat Unre or Liew 57 Reprint 2025-26 :

[Page 10]
SCIENCE58 5858 5858 What you have learnt · The fundamental organisational unit of life is the cell. · Cells are enclosed by a plasma membrane composed of lipids and proteins. · The cell membrane is an active part of the cell. It regulates the movement of materials between the ordered interior of the cell and the outer environment. · In plant cells, a cell wall composed mainly of cellulose is located outside the cell membrane. · The presence of the cell wall enables the cells of plants, fungi and bacteria to exist in hypotonic media without bursting. · The nucleus in eukaryotes is separated from the cytoplasm by double-layered membrane and it directs the life processes of the cell. · The ER functions both as a passageway for intracellular transport and as a manufacturing surface. · The Golgi apparatus consists of stacks of membrane-bound vesicles that function in the storage, modification and packaging of substances manufactured in the cell. · Most plant cells have large membranous organelles called plastids, which are of two types—chromoplasts and leucoplasts. Fig. 5.7: Fig. 5.7:Fig. 5.7: Fig. 5.7:Fig. 5.7: Mitosis Fig. 5.8: Fig. 5.8:Fig. 5.8: Fig. 5.8:Fig. 5.8: Meiosis divides to form two identical daughter cells (Fig. 5.7). The daughter cells have the same number of chromosomes as mother cell. It helps in growth and repair of tissues in organisms. Specific cells of reproductive organs or tissues in animals and plants divide to form gametes, which after fertilisation give rise to offspring. They divide by a different process called meiosis which involves two consecutive divisions. When a cell divides by meiosis it produces four new cells instead of just two (Fig. 5.8). The new cells only have half the number of chromosomes than that of the mother cells. Can you think as to why the chromosome number has reduced to half in daughter cells? Chromosomes Mother cell Mother cell Daughter cells Daughter cells Meiosis-I Meiosis-II Reprint 2025-26
Chromosomes Meiosis I Al Z) Meiosis-1 Q) o73 a“ >< CTD Daughter a P) a ere 7 $3 Mother cell \ { ] Mother cell Fig. 5.7: Mitosis Fig. 5.8: Meiosis \3 divides to form two identical daughter cells — They divide by a different process called (Fig. 5.7). The daughter cells have the same meiosis which involves two consecutive number of chromosomes as mother cell. It divisions. When a cell divides by meiosis it helps in growth and repair of tissues — produces four new cells instead of just two Fig. in organisms. 5.8). The new cells only have half the number Specific cells of reproductive organs or tissues of chromosomes than that of the mother cells. in animals and plants divide to form gametes. = Can you think as to why the chromosome which after fertilisation give rise to offspring. nurnber has reduced to half in daughter cells? Ld) What it / ‘earnt ° The fundamental organisational unit of life is the cell. e Cells are enclosed by a plasma membrane composed of lipids and proteins. ° The cell membrane is an active part of the cell. It regulates the movement of materials between the ordered interior of the cell and the outer environment. e In plant cells, a cell wall composed mainly of cellulose is located outside the cell membrane. ° The presence of the cell wall enables the cells of plants, fungi and bacteria to exist in hypotonic media without bursting. ° The nucleus in eukaryotes is separated from the cytoplasm by double-layered membrane and it directs the life processes of the cell. ° The ER functions both as a passageway for intracellular transport and as a manufacturing surface. e The Golgi apparatus consists of stacks of membrane-bound vesicles that function in the storage, modification and packaging of substances manufactured in the cell. ° Most plant cells have large membranous organelles called plastids, which are of two types—chromoplasts and leucoplasts. 58 SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26