[Page 3]
SCIENCE28 We might think that if atoms ar e so insignificant in size, why should we care about them? This is because our entire world is made up of atoms. We may not be able to see them, but they are there, and constantly affecting whatever we do. Through modern techniques, we can now produce magnified images of surfaces of elements showing atoms. observations are in agreement with the law of conservation of mass. sodium carbonate + acetic acid → sodium acetate + carbon dioxide + water 2. Hydrogen and oxygen combine in the ratio of 1:8 by mass to form water. What mass of oxygen gas would be r equir ed to react completely with 3 g of hydrogen gas? 3. Which postulate of Dalton’s atomic theory is the result of the law of conservation of mass? 4. Which postulate of Dalton’s atomic theory can explain the law of definite proportions? 3.2 What is an Atom? Have you ever observed a mason building walls, from these walls a r oom and then a collection of rooms to form a building? What is the building block of the huge building? What about the building block of an ant-hill? It is a small grain of sand. Similarly, the building blocks of all matter are atoms. How big are atoms? Atoms are very small, they are smaller than anything that we can imagine or compar e with. Mor e than millions of atoms when stacked would make a layer barely as thick as this sheet of paper. Atomic radius is measured in nanometres. 1/10 9 m = 1 nm 1 m = 109 nm Relative Sizes Radii (in m) Example 10–10 Atom of hydrogen 10–9 Molecule of water 10–8 Molecule of haemoglobin 10–4 Grain of sand 10–3 Ant 10–1 Apple Fig. 3.2: An image of the surface of silicon 3.2.1 WHAT ARE THE MODERN DAY SYMBOLS OF ATOMS OF DIFFERENT ELEMENTS ? Dalton was the first scientist to use the symbols for elements in a very specific sense. When he used a symbol for an element he also meant a definite quantity of that element, that is, one atom of that element. Berzilius suggested that the symbols of elements be made from one or two letters of the name of the element. Fig. 3.3: Symbols for some elements as proposed by Dalton Reprint 2025-26
observations are in agreement We might think that if atoms are so with the law of conservation of insignificant in size, why should we care about LISS, them? This is because our entire world is made sodium carbonate + acctic acid up of atoms. We may not be able to see them, » sodium acctate + carbon but they are there, and constantly affecting dioxide + water whatever we do. Through modern techniques, 2. Hydrogen and oxvgcn combine in we can now produce magnified images of the ratio of 1:8 by mass to form surfaces of elements showing atoms. Water, What mass of oXVECH Gas . would be requircd to react completely with 3 g of hydrogen gas? & Which postulate of Dalton’s atomic (heory is the result of the law of conscrvation of niass? 4. Which postulate of Dalton’s atomic theory can explain dhe baw of detinite proporions? 3.2 What is an Atom? Have you ever observed a mason building walls, from these walls a room and then a Fig. 3.2: An finage of the surface of silicon collection of rooms to form a building? What is the building block of the huge building? What about the building block ofan ant-hill? 3.2.1 WHAT ARE THE MODERN DAY It is a small grain of sand. Similarly, the SYMBOLS OF ATOMS OF DIFFERENT building blocks of all matter are atoms. ELEMENTS? How big are atoms? Dalton was the first scientist to use the Atoms are very small, they are smaller than . tee sien os canes symbols for elements in a very specific sense. anything that we can imagine or compare i . - : oa ee : When he used a symbol for an element he with. More than millions of atoms when : . . also meant a definite quantity of that element. stacked would make a layer barely as thick . - ae we , . that is. one atom of that element. Berzilius as this sheet of paper. : suggested that the symbols of elements be Atomic radius fs measured in nanometres. made from one or two letters of the name of 1/10*m = Inm the element. lm = 10%nm Relative Sizes () Hydrogen OQ Carbon @ Oxygen Radit (in m) 4 s a or - Molecule of water (cS) Copper @ Lead (8) Silver Molecule of haemoglobin - Fig. 3.3: Syinbols for some elernents as proposed by Apple hen 28 Sewence Reprint 2025-26

[Page 4]
ATOMS AND MOLECULES 29 In the beginning, the names of elements were derived from the name of the place where they were found for the first time. For example, the name copper was taken from Cyprus. Some names were taken from specific colours. For example, gold was taken from the English word meaning yellow. Now-a-days, IUPAC (International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry) is an international scientific organisation which approves names of elements, symbols and units. Many of the symbols are the first one or two letters of the element’s name in English. The first letter of a symbol is always written as a capital letter (uppercase) and the second letter as a small letter (lowercase). For example (i) hydrogen, H (ii) aluminium, Al and not AL (iii) cobalt, Co and not CO. Symbols of some elements are formed from the first letter of the name and a letter , appearing later in the name. Examples are: (i) chlorine, Cl, (ii) zinc, Zn etc. Other symbols have been taken from the names of elements in Latin, German or Greek. For example, the symbol of iron is Fe from its Latin name ferrum, sodium is Na from natrium, potassium is K from kalium. Therefore, each element has a name and a unique chemical symbol. (The above table is given for you to refer to whenever you study about elements. Do not bother to memorise all in one go. With the passage of time and repeated usage you will automatically be able to reproduce the symbols). 3.2.2 ATOMIC MASS The most remarkable concept that Dalton’s atomic theory proposed was that of the atomic mass. According to him, each element had a characteristic atomic mass. The theory could explain the law of constant proportions so well that scientists were prompted to measure the atomic mass of an atom. Since determining the mass of an individual atom was a relatively difficult task, relative atomic masses were determined using the laws of chemical combinations and the compounds formed. Let us take the example of a compound, carbon monoxide (CO) formed by carbon and oxygen. It was observed experimentally that 3 g of carbon combines with 4 g of oxygen to form CO. In other words, carbon combines with 4/3 times its mass of oxygen. Suppose we define the atomic mass unit (earlier abbreviated as ‘amu’, but according to the latest IUPAC recommendations, it is now written as ‘u’ – unified mass) as equal to the mass of one carbon atom, then we would assign carbon an atomic mass of 1.0 u and oxygen an atomic mass of 1.33 u. However, it is more convenient to have these numbers as Table 3.1: Symbols for some elements Element Symbol Element Symbol Element Symbol Aluminium Al Copper Cu Nitrogen N Argon Ar Fluorine F Oxygen O Barium Ba Gold Au Potassium K Boron B Hydrogen H Silicon Si Bromine Br Iodine I Silver Ag Calcium Ca Iron Fe Sodium Na Carbon C Lead Pb Sulphur S Chlorine Cl Magnesium Mg Uranium U Cobalt Co Neon Ne Zinc Zn Reprint 2025-26
In the beginning, the names ofelements passage of time and repeated usage you will were derived from the name of the place automatically be able to reproduce where they were found for the first time. For the symbols). example, the name copper was taken from Cyprus. Some names were taken from se . vee specific colours. For example. gold was taken 3.2.2 ATOMIC MASS from the English word meaning yellow. The most remarkable concept that Dalton’s Now-a-days, IUPAC {International Union of atomic theory proposed was that of the atomic Pure and Applied Chemistry) is an ass. Ace di sto hi ach element had ¢ international scientific organisation which — M@SS. According to him, each element had a approves names of elements, symbols and — characteristic atomic mass. The theory could units. Many of the symbols are the first one explain the law of constant proportions so well or two letters of the element's name in that scientists were prompted to measure the English. The first letter ofa symbol is always atomic mass of an atom. Since determining the written as a capital letter (uppercase) and the mass of an individual atom was a relatively second letter as a small letter (lowercase). , . difficult task, relative atomic masses were For example determined using the laws of chemical (i) hydrogen, H combinations and the compounds formed. (ii) aluminium, Aland not Al. Let us take the example of a compound, (iii) cobalt, Co and not CO. carbon monoxide (CO) formed by carbon and Symbols of some elements are formed from oxygen. It was observed experimentally that 3 the first letter of the name and a letter, ¢ of carbon combines with 4 g of oxygen to tine in the name. Examples are: (i form CO. In other words, carbon combines Other symbols have been taken from the with 4/3 times its mass of oxygen. Suppose names of elements in Latin, German or Greek. We define the atomic mass unit (earlier For example, the symbol of iron is Fe from its — abbreviated as ‘amu’, but according to the Latin name ferrum, sodium is Na from natrium, latest IUPAC recommendations, it is now potassium is K from kalium, Therefore. each written as ‘uv’ - unified mass) as equal to the element has a name and a unique mass of one carbon atom, then we would chemical symbol. Table 3.1: Symbols for some elements Element Symbol Element Symbol Element Symbol Aluminium Al Copper Cu Nitrogen N Argon Ar Fluorine F Oxygen 0 Barium Ba Gold Au Potassium K Boron B Hydrogen H Silicon St Bromine Br lodine I Silver Ag Calcium Ca Iron Fe Sodium Na Carbon Cc Lead Pb Sulphur $s Chlorine cl Magnesium Mg Uranium U Cobalt Co Neon Ne Zinc zn (The above table is given for you to refer to assign carbon an atomic mass of 1.0 u and whenever you study about elements. Do not oxygen an atomic mass of 1.33 u. However, it bother to memorise all in one go. With the — is more convenient to have these numbers as Arous ann Motions 29 Reprint 2025-26