[Page 1]
Ancient Indian and Greek philosophers have always wonder ed about the unknown and unseen form of matter. The idea of divisibility of matter was considered long back in India, around 500 BC. An Indian philosopher Maharishi Kanad, postulated that if we go on dividing matter (padarth), we shall get smaller and smaller particles. Ultimately, a stage will come when we shall come across the smallest particles beyond which further division will not be possible. He named these particles Par manu . Another Indian philosopher , Pakudha Katyayama, elaborated this doctrine and said that these particles nor mally exist in a combined for m which gives us various forms of matter. Around the same era, ancient Gr eek philosophers – Democritus and Leucippus suggested that if we go on dividing matter, a stage will come when particles obtained cannot be divided further. Democritus called these indivisible particles atoms (meaning indivisible). All this was based on philosophical considerations and not much experimental work to validate these ideas could be done till the eighteenth century. By the end of the eighteenth century, scientists r ecognised the difference between elements and compounds and naturally became interested in finding out how and why elements combine and what happens when they combine. Antoine L. Lavoisier laid the foundation of chemical sciences by establishing two important laws of chemical combination. 3.1 Laws of Chemical Combination The following two laws of chemical combination were established after much experimentations by Lavoisier and Joseph L. Proust. 3.1.1 LAW OF CONSERVATION OF MASS Is there a change in mass when a chemical change (chemical reaction) takes place? Activity ______________ 3.1 • Take one of the following sets, X and Y of chemicals— X Y (i) copper sulphate sodium carbonate (ii) barium chloride sodium sulphate (iii) lead nitrate sodium chloride • Prepare separately a 5% solution of any one pair of substances listed under X and Y each in 10 mL in water. • Take a little amount of solution of Y in a conical flask and some solution of X in an ignition tube. • Hang the ignition tube in the flask carefully; see that the solutions do not get mixed. Put a cork on the flask (see Fig. 3.1). Fig. 3.1: Ignition tube containing solution of X, dipped in a conical flask containing solution of Y 3 AAA AATOMS TOMSTOMS TOMSTOMS AND ANDAND ANDAND M M M M MOLECULESOLECULESOLECULESOLECULESOLECULES C hapter Reprint 2025-26
op =o haptered nb ER ol ope oe vriet 98 ATOMS AND MOLECULES Ancient Indian and Greek philosophers have = much experimentations by Lavoisier and always wondered about the unknown and — Joseph L. Proust. unseen form of matter. The idea of divisibility of matter was considered long back in India. — 3.1.1. LAW OF CONSERVATION OF MASS around 500 BC. An Indian philosopher Maharishi Kanad, postulated that ifwe goon Is there a change in mass when a chemical dividing matter (padarth), we shall get smaller change (chemical reaction) takes place? and smaller particles. Ultimately, a stage will sttest come when we shall come across the smallest Activity — 3.1 particles beyond which further division will e Take one of the following sets, X and Y not be possible. He named these particles of chemicals— : Parmanu. Another Indian philosopher. xX Y Pakudha Katyayama, elaborated this doctrine (i) copper sulphate sodium carbonate and said that these particles normally exist in a combined form which gives us various Qi} harium chloride sodium sulphate forms of matter. Around the same era, ancient Greek (iii) lead nitrate sodium chloride philosophers - Democritus and Leucippus | suggested that if we go on dividing matter, a ° Prepare separately a 5% solution of whe , . sth, artiolme . any one pair of substances listed stage will come when particles obtained ler X and Y cach in 10 ml in water cannot be divided further. Democritus called an : re ae . « ‘ van . Take a little amount of solution of Y in these indivisible particles atoms (meaning a conical flask and some solution of indivisible). All this was hased on X in an ignition tube. philosophical considerations and not much * Hang the ignition tube in the flask experimental work to validate these ideas carefully: see that the solutions do not could be done till the eighteenth century. get mixed. Put a cork on the flask By the end of the eighteenth century. (see Fig. 3.1). scientists recognised the difference between Yn Cork elements and compounds and naturally Y became interested in finding out how and why Uy 6 Thread elements combine and what happens when they combine. . Conical flask Antoine L. Lavoisier laid the foundation \ of chemical sciences by establishing two <3 Small ignition tube important laws of chemical combination. a ]*\ Solution of X 3.1 Laws of Chemical Combination Et Sohation of ¥ The following two laws of chemical Fig. 3.1: ignition tube containing solution of X, dipped combination were established after tna conical flask containing solution of ¥ Reprint 2025-26

[Page 2]
ATOMS AND MOLECULES 27 • Weigh the flask with its contents carefully. • Now tilt and swirl the flask, so that the solutions X and Y get mixed. • Weigh again. • What happens in the reaction flask? • Do you think that a chemical r eaction has taken place? • Why should we put a cork on the mouth of the flask? • Does the mass of the flask and its contents change? Law of conservation of mass states that mass can neither be created nor destroyed in a chemical reaction. 3.1.2 LAW OF CONSTANT PROPORTIONS Lavoisier, along with other scientists, noted that many compounds were composed of two or more elements and each such compound had the same elements in the same proportions, irrespective of where the compound came from or who prepared it. In a compound such as water, the ratio of the mass of hydrogen to the mass of oxygen is always 1:8, whatever the source of water. Thus, if 9 g of water is decomposed, 1 g of hydrogen and 8 g of oxygen are always obtained. Similarly in ammonia, nitrogen and hydrogen are always present in the ratio 14:3 by mass, whatever the method or the source from which it is obtained. This led to the law of constant proportions which is also known as the law of definite proportions. This law was stated by Proust as “In a chemical substance the elements are always present in definite proportions by mass”. The next problem faced by scientists was to give appropriate explanations of these laws. British chemist John Dalton provided the basic theory about the natur e of matter . Dalton picked up the idea of divisibility of matter, which was till then just a philosophy. He took the name ‘atoms’ as given by the Greeks and said that the smallest particles of matter are atoms. His theory was based on the laws of chemical combination. Dalton’s atomic theory provided an explanation for the law of conservation of mass and the law of definite proportions. John Dalton was born in a poor weaver’s family in 1766 in England. He began his car eer as a teacher at the age of twelve. Seven years later he became a school principal. In 1793, Dalton left for Manchester to teach mathematics, physics and chemistry in a college. He spent most of his life there teaching and researching. In 1808, he presented his atomic theory which was a turning point in the study of matter. According to Dalton’s atomic theory, all matter, whether an element, a compound or a mixture is composed of small particles called atoms. The postulates of this theory may be stated as follows: (i) All matter is made of very tiny particles called atoms, which participate in chemical reactions. (ii) Atoms are indivisible particles, which cannot be cr eated or destr oyed in a chemical reaction. (iii) Atoms of a given element are identical in mass and chemical properties. (iv) Atoms of dif fer ent elements have dif fer ent masses and chemical properties. (v) Atoms combine in the ratio of small whole numbers to form compounds. (vi) The r elative number and kinds of atoms are constant in a given compound. You will study in the next chapter that all atoms are made up of still smaller particles. uestions 1. In a r eaction, 5.3 g of sodium carbonate reacted with 6 g of acetic acid. The products were 2.2 g of carbon dioxide, 0.9 g water and 8.2 g of sodium acetate. Show that these Q John Dalton Reprint 2025-26
e = =Weigh the flask with its contents conservation of mass and the law of carefully. definite proportions. . Now tilt and swirl the flask, so that the solutions X and Y¥ get mixed. John Dalton was born in © Weigh again. a poor weaver's family in fry . What happens in the reaction Nask? 1766 in England. He 4 6 . Do you think that a chemical reaction began his career as a }, @ i has taken place? teacher at the age of e Why should we puta cork on the mouth twelve. Seven years later “4 of the flask? he became a school Vv . . Does the mass of the flask and its principal. In 1793, Dalton contents change? left for Manchester to Ny Law of conservation of mass states that teach — mathematics, John Dalton physics and chemistry in mass can neither be created nor destroyed in a college. He spent most of his life there a chemical reaction. teaching and researching. In 1808. he 3.1.2 LAW OF CONSTANT PROPORTIONS presented his atomic theory which was a turning point in the study of matter. Lavoisier, along with other scientists, noted that many compounds were composed of two According to Dalton’s atomic theory, all or more elements and each such compound — matter, whether an element, a compound or had the same elements in the same — amixture is composed of small particles called proportions, irrespective of where the atoms. The postulates of this theory may be compound came from or who prepared it. stated as follows: Ina compound such as water, the ratio of (i) All matter is made of very tiny particles the mass of hydrogen to the mass of oxygen is called atoms, which participate in always 1:8, whatever the source of water. Thus, chemical reactions. if 9 g of water is decomposed, 1 g of hydrogen {ii) Atoms are indivisible particles, which and 8 g of oxygen are always obtained. cannot be created or destroyed in a Similarly in ammonia, nitrogen and hydrogen chemical reaction. are always present in the ratio 14:3 by mass, {ili) Atoms of a given element are identical whatever the method or the source from which in mass and chemical properties. it is obtained. {iv) Atoms of different elements have This led to the law of constant proportions different: masses and chemical which is also known as the law of definite properties. . proportions. This law was stated by Proust as {v] Atoms combine in the ratio of small “In a chemical substance the elements are whole numbers to form compounds. always present in definite proportions by {vi) The relative number and kinds of mass”. atoms are constant in a given The next problem faced by scientists was compound. to give appropriate explanations of these laws. You will study in the next chapter that all British chemist John Dalton provided the atoms are made up of still smaller particles. basic theory about the nature of matter. at : Dalton picked up the idea of divisibility of (1 vestious matter, which was ull then just a philosophy. | fof a reaction, 5.3 g of sodium He took the name ‘atoms’ as given by the carbonate reacted with 6 @ of Greeks and said that the smallest particles of acetic acid. The products were matter are atoms, His theory was based on the | 2.2 8 of carbon dioxide, 0.9 g laws of chemical combination. Dalton’s atomic y Water and &.2 2 of sodium theory provided an explanation for the law of acetate. Show that these Arous ann Motions 27 Reprint 2025-26 :