[Page 5]
SCIENCE30 whole numbers or as near to a whole numbers as possible. While sear ching for various atomic mass units, scientists initially took 1/ 16 of the mass of an atom of naturally occurring oxygen as the unit. This was considered relevant due to two reasons: • oxygen reacted with a lar ge number of elements and formed compounds. • this atomic mass unit gave masses of most of the elements as whole numbers. However , in 1961 for a universally accepted atomic mass unit, carbon-12 isotope was chosen as the standar d r eference for measuring atomic masses. One atomic mass unit is a mass unit equal to exactly one-twelfth (1/12th) the mass of one atom of carbon-12. The r elative atomic masses of all elements have been found with r espect to an atom of carbon-12. Imagine a fruit seller selling fruits without any standard weight with him. He takes a watermelon and says, “this has a mass equal to 12 units” (12 watermelon units or 12 fruit mass units). He makes twelve equal pieces of the watermelon and finds the mass of each fruit he is selling, relative to the mass of one piece of the watermelon. Now he sells his fruits by relative fruit mass unit (fmu), as in Fig. 3.4. Fig. 3.4 : (a) Watermelon, (b) 12 pieces, (c) 1/12 of watermelon, (d) how the fruit seller can weigh the fruits using pieces of watermelon Similarly, the relative atomic mass of the atom of an element is defined as the average mass of the atom, as compared to 1/12th the mass of one carbon-12 atom. Table 3.2: Atomic masses of a few elements Element Atomic Mass (u) Hydrogen 1 Carbon 12 Nitrogen 14 Oxygen 16 Sodium 23 Magnesium 24 Sulphur 32 Chlorine 35.5 Calcium 40 3.2.3 HOW DO ATOMS EXIST? Atoms of most elements are not able to exist independently. Atoms for m molecules and ions. These molecules or ions aggr egate in large numbers to form the matter that we can see, feel or touch. uestions 1. Define the atomic mass unit. 2. Why is it not possible to see an atom with naked eyes? 3.3 What is a Molecule? A molecule is in general a group of two or more atoms that are chemically bonded together, that is, tightly held together by attractive forces. A molecule can be defined as the smallest particle of an element or a compound that is capable of an independent existence and shows all the properties of that substance. Atoms of the same element or of different elements can join together to form molecules. Q

[Page 6]
ATOMS AND MOLECULES 31 3.3.1 MOLECULES OF ELEMENTS The molecules of an element are constituted by the same type of atoms. Molecules of many elements, such as argon (Ar), helium (He) etc. are made up of only one atom of that element. But this is not the case with most of the non- metals. For example, a molecule of oxygen consists of two atoms of oxygen and hence it is known as a diatomic molecule, O 2. If 3 atoms of oxygen unite into a molecule, instead of the usual 2, we get ozone, O3. The number of atoms constituting a molecule is known as its atomicity. Metals and some other elements, such as carbon, do not have a simple structur e but consist of a very large and indefinite number of atoms bonded together. Let us look at the atomicity of some non-metals. Table 3.3 : Atomicity of some elements Type of Name Atomicity Element Non-Metal Argon Monoatomic Helium Monoatomic Oxygen Diatomic Hydrogen Diatomic Nitrogen Diatomic Chlorine Diatomic Phosphorus Tetra-atomic Sulphur Poly-atomic Table 3.4 : Molecules of some compounds Compound Combining Ratio Elements by Mass Water (H2O) Hydrogen, Oxygen 1:8 Ammonia (NH3) Nitrogen, Hydrogen 14:3 Carbon dioxide (CO2) Carbon, Oxygen 3:8 Activity 3.2 • Refer to Table 3.4 for ratio by mass of atoms present in molecules and Table 3.2 for atomic masses of elements. Find the ratio by number of the atoms of elements in the molecules of compounds given in Table 3.4. • The ratio by number of atoms for a water molecule can be found as follows: Element Ratio Atomic Mass Simplest by mass ratio/ ratio mass (u) atomic mass H 1 1 1 1 =1 2 O 8 16 8 16 = 1 2 1 • Thus, the ratio by number of atoms for water is H:O = 2:1. 3.3.3 WHAT IS AN ION? Compounds composed of metals and non- metals contain charged species. The char ged species are known as ions. Ions may consist of a single charged atom or a group of atoms that have a net charge on them. An ion can be negatively or positively charged. A negatively charged ion is called an ‘anion’ and the positively charged ion, a ‘cation’. Take, for example, sodium chloride (NaCl). Its constituent particles are positively charged sodium ions (Na +) and negatively charged 3.3.2 MOLECULES OF COMPOUNDS Atoms of different elements join together in definite proportions to form molecules of compounds. Few examples are given in Table 3.4.

[Page 7]
SCIENCE32 chloride ions (Cl–). A group of atoms carrying a charge is known as a polyatomic ion (Table 3.6). We shall learn more about the formation of ions in Chapter 4. learn the symbols and combining capacity of the elements. The combining power (or capacity) of an element is known as its valency. Valency can be used to find out how the atoms of an element will combine with the atom(s) of another element to form a chemical compound. The valency of the atom of an element can be thought of as hands or arms of that atom. Human beings have two arms and an octopus has eight. If one octopus has to catch hold of a few people in such a manner that all the eight arms of the octopus and both arms of all the humans are locked, how many humans do you think the octopus can hold? Represent the octopus with O and humans with H. Can you write a formula for this combination? Do you get OH4 as the formula? The subscript 4 indicates the number of humans held by the octopus. The valencies of some common ions are given in Table 3.6. We will learn more about valency in the next chapter. * Some elements show more than one valency. A Roman numeral shows their valency in a bracket. Table 3.5: Some ionic compounds Ionic Constituting Ratio Compound Elements by Mass Calcium oxide Calcium and oxygen 5:2 Magnesium Magnesium sulphide and sulphur 3:4 Sodium Sodium chloride and chlorine 23:35.5 3.4 Writing Chemical Formulae The chemical formula of a compound is a symbolic representation of its composition. The chemical formulae of different compounds can be written easily. For this exercise, we need to Table 3.6: Names and symbols of some ions Vale- Name of Symbol Non- Symbol Polyatomic Symbol ncy ion metallic ions element 1. Sodium Na+ Hydrogen H+ Ammonium NH4 + Potassium K+ Hydride H- Hydroxide OH– Silver Ag+ Chloride Cl- Nitrate NO3 – Copper (I)* Cu+ Bromide Br- Hydrogen Iodide I– carbonate HCO3 – 2. Magnesium Mg2+ Oxide O2- Carbonate CO3 2– Calcium Ca2+ Sulphide S2- Sulphite SO3 2– Zinc Zn2+ Sulphate SO4 2– Iron (II)* Fe2+ Copper (II)* Cu2+ 3. Aluminium Al3+ Nitride N3- Phosphate PO4 3– Iron (III)* Fe3+

[Page 8]
ATOMS AND MOLECULES 33 3. Formula of carbon tetrachloride For magnesium chloride, we write the symbol of cation (Mg 2+) first followed by the symbol of anion (Cl-). Then their charges are criss-crossed to get the formula. 4. Formula of magnesium chloride Formula : MgCl2 Thus, in magnesium chloride, ther e are two chloride ions (Cl -) for each magnesium ion (Mg2+). The positive and negative charges must balance each other and the overall structure must be neutral. Note that in the formula, the charges on the ions are not indicated. Some more examples (a) Formula for aluminium oxide: Formula : Al2O3 (b) Formula for calcium oxide: Here, the valencies of the two elements are the same. You may arrive at the formula Ca2O2. But we simplify the formula as CaO. The rules that you have to follow while writing a chemical formula are as follows: • the valencies or charges on the ion must balance. • when a compound consists of a metal and a non-metal, the name or symbol of the metal is written first. For example: calcium oxide (CaO), sodium chloride (NaCl), iron sulphide (FeS), copper oxide (CuO), etc., where oxygen, chlorine, sulphur are non- metals and are written on the right, whereas calcium, sodium, iron and copper are metals, and are written on the left. • in compounds formed with polyatomic ions, the number of ions present in the compound is indicated by enclosing the formula of ion in a bracket and writing the number of ions outside the bracket. For example, Mg (OH)2. In case the number of polyatomic ion is one, the bracket is not required. For example, NaOH. 3.4.1 FORMULAE OF SIMPLE COMPOUNDS The simplest compounds, which are made up of two different elements are called binary compounds. Valencies of some ions are given in T able 3.6. Y ou can use these to write formulae for compounds. While writing the chemical formulae for compounds, we write the constituent elements and their valencies as shown below. Then we must crossover the valencies of the combining atoms. Examples 1. Formula of hydrogen chloride Formula of the compound would be HCl. 2. Formula of hydrogen sulphide

[Page 9]
SCIENCE34 3434 3434 2. Write down the names of compounds represented by the following formulae: (i) Al2(SO4)3 (ii) CaCl2 (iii) K2SO4 (iv) KNO3 (v) CaCO3. 3. What is meant by the term chemical formula? 4. How many atoms are present in a (i) H2S molecule and (ii) PO4 3– ion? 3.5 Molecular Mass In section 3.2.2 we discussed the concept of atomic mass. This concept can be extended to calculate molecular masses. The molecular mass of a substance is the sum of the atomic masses of all the atoms in a molecule of the substance. It is therefore the relative mass of a molecule expressed in atomic mass units (u). Example 3.1 Example 3.1 Example 3.1 Example 3.1 Example 3.1 (a) C alculate the relative molecular mass of water (H 2O). (b) Calculate the molecular mass of HNO3. Solution: Solution:Solution:Solution:Solution: (a) Atomic mass of hydrogen = 1u, oxygen = 16 u So the molecular mass of water, which contains two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen is = 2 ´ 1+ 1´16 = 18 u (b) The molecular mass of HNO 3 = the atomic mass of H + the atomic mass of N+ 3 ´ the atomic mass of O = 1 + 14 + 48 = 63 u 3.5.1 FORMULA UNIT MASS The formula unit mass of a substance is a sum of the atomic masses of all atoms in a formula unit of a compound. F ormula unit mass is calculated in the same manner as we calculate the molecular mass. The only difference is that (c) Formula of sodium nitrate: Formula : NaNO3 (d) Formula of calcium hydroxide: Formula : Ca(OH)2 Note that the formula of calcium hydroxide is Ca(OH)2 and not CaOH2. We use brackets when we have two or more of the same ions in the formula. Here, the bracket around OH with a subscript 2 indicates that there are two hydroxyl (OH) groups joined to one calcium atom. In other words, there are two atoms each of oxygen and hydrogen in calcium hydroxide. (e) Formula of sodium carbonate: Formula : Na2CO3 In the above example, brackets are not needed if there is only one ion present. (f) Formula of ammonium sulphate: Formula : (NH4)2SO4 Q uestions 1. Write down the formulae of (i) sodium oxide (ii) aluminium chloride (iii) sodium sulphide (iv) magnesium hydroxide