[Page 5]
SCIENCE30 whole numbers or as near to a whole numbers as possible. While sear ching for various atomic mass units, scientists initially took 1/ 16 of the mass of an atom of naturally occurring oxygen as the unit. This was considered relevant due to two reasons: • oxygen reacted with a lar ge number of elements and formed compounds. • this atomic mass unit gave masses of most of the elements as whole numbers. However , in 1961 for a universally accepted atomic mass unit, carbon-12 isotope was chosen as the standar d r eference for measuring atomic masses. One atomic mass unit is a mass unit equal to exactly one-twelfth (1/12th) the mass of one atom of carbon-12. The r elative atomic masses of all elements have been found with r espect to an atom of carbon-12. Imagine a fruit seller selling fruits without any standard weight with him. He takes a watermelon and says, “this has a mass equal to 12 units” (12 watermelon units or 12 fruit mass units). He makes twelve equal pieces of the watermelon and finds the mass of each fruit he is selling, relative to the mass of one piece of the watermelon. Now he sells his fruits by relative fruit mass unit (fmu), as in Fig. 3.4. Fig. 3.4 : (a) Watermelon, (b) 12 pieces, (c) 1/12 of watermelon, (d) how the fruit seller can weigh the fruits using pieces of watermelon Similarly, the relative atomic mass of the atom of an element is defined as the average mass of the atom, as compared to 1/12th the mass of one carbon-12 atom. Table 3.2: Atomic masses of a few elements Element Atomic Mass (u) Hydrogen 1 Carbon 12 Nitrogen 14 Oxygen 16 Sodium 23 Magnesium 24 Sulphur 32 Chlorine 35.5 Calcium 40 3.2.3 HOW DO ATOMS EXIST? Atoms of most elements are not able to exist independently. Atoms for m molecules and ions. These molecules or ions aggr egate in large numbers to form the matter that we can see, feel or touch. uestions 1. Define the atomic mass unit. 2. Why is it not possible to see an atom with naked eyes? 3.3 What is a Molecule? A molecule is in general a group of two or more atoms that are chemically bonded together, that is, tightly held together by attractive forces. A molecule can be defined as the smallest particle of an element or a compound that is capable of an independent existence and shows all the properties of that substance. Atoms of the same element or of different elements can join together to form molecules. Q Reprint 2025-26
whole numbers or as near toa whole numbers — mass of the atom, as compared to 1/12" the as possible. While searching for various — mass of one carbon-12 atom. atomic mass units, scientists initially took 1/ 16 of the mass of an atom of naturally Table 3.2: Atomic masses of occurring oxygen as the unit. This was a few elements considered relevant due to two reasons: e oxygen reacted with a large number of Element. Atomic Mass (u) elements and formed compounds. drow e this atomic mass unit gave masses of Hydrogen ! most of the elements as whole numbers. Carbon 12 However, in 1961 for a universally Nitrogen 14 accepted atomic mass unit, carbon-12 isotope Oxi 16 was chosen as the standard reference for xygen measuring atomic masses. One atomic mass Sodium 23 unit is a mass unit equal to exactly one-twelfth Magnesium 24 (1/12) the mass of one atom of carbon-12. oe The relative atomic masses of all elements Sulphur 32 have been found with respect to an atom of Chlorine 35.5 carbon- 12. Calcium 40 Imagine a fruit seller selling fruits without any standard weight with him. He takes a watermelon and says, “this has a mass equal 3.2.3 How bo ATOMS EXIST? to 12 units” (12 watermelon units or 12 fruit mass units). He makes twelve equal pieces of | Atoms of most elements are not able to exist the watermelon and finds the mass ofeach fruit independently. Atoms form molecules and he is selling, relative to the mass of one piece — ions. These molecules or ions aggregate in of the watermelon. Now he sells his fruits by large numbers to form the matter that we can relative fruit mass unit (fmu), as in Fig. 3.4. see, feel or touch. ( nestions ww 1.) Detine the atomic niass wit ta) (b) ) | 2. Why is it not possible to sec an i) atom With naked eves? 3.3, What is a Molecule? A molecule is in general a group of two or more atoms that are chemically bonded (an together, that is. tightly held together by attractive forces. A molecule can be defined Fig. 3.4 : (0) Watermelon, (b) 12 pieces, (co) 1/12 of — a8 the smallest particle of an element or a watermelon, (d) how the fruit seller can compound that is capable of an independent weigh the fruits using pieces ofwatermelon existence and shows all the properties of that substance. Atoms of the same element or of Similarly, the relative atomic mass of the different elements can join together to form atom of an element is defined as the average — molecules. 30 Sewence Reprint 2025-26

[Page 6]
ATOMS AND MOLECULES 31 3.3.1 MOLECULES OF ELEMENTS The molecules of an element are constituted by the same type of atoms. Molecules of many elements, such as argon (Ar), helium (He) etc. are made up of only one atom of that element. But this is not the case with most of the non- metals. For example, a molecule of oxygen consists of two atoms of oxygen and hence it is known as a diatomic molecule, O 2. If 3 atoms of oxygen unite into a molecule, instead of the usual 2, we get ozone, O3. The number of atoms constituting a molecule is known as its atomicity. Metals and some other elements, such as carbon, do not have a simple structur e but consist of a very large and indefinite number of atoms bonded together. Let us look at the atomicity of some non-metals. Table 3.3 : Atomicity of some elements Type of Name Atomicity Element Non-Metal Argon Monoatomic Helium Monoatomic Oxygen Diatomic Hydrogen Diatomic Nitrogen Diatomic Chlorine Diatomic Phosphorus Tetra-atomic Sulphur Poly-atomic Table 3.4 : Molecules of some compounds Compound Combining Ratio Elements by Mass Water (H2O) Hydrogen, Oxygen 1:8 Ammonia (NH3) Nitrogen, Hydrogen 14:3 Carbon dioxide (CO2) Carbon, Oxygen 3:8 Activity ______________ 3.2 • Refer to Table 3.4 for ratio by mass of atoms present in molecules and Table 3.2 for atomic masses of elements. Find the ratio by number of the atoms of elements in the molecules of compounds given in Table 3.4. • The ratio by number of atoms for a water molecule can be found as follows: Element Ratio Atomic Mass Simplest by mass ratio/ ratio mass (u) atomic mass H 1 1 1 1 =1 2 O 8 16 8 16 = 1 2 1 • Thus, the ratio by number of atoms for water is H:O = 2:1. 3.3.3 WHAT IS AN ION? Compounds composed of metals and non- metals contain charged species. The char ged species are known as ions. Ions may consist of a single charged atom or a group of atoms that have a net charge on them. An ion can be negatively or positively charged. A negatively charged ion is called an ‘anion’ and the positively charged ion, a ‘cation’. Take, for example, sodium chloride (NaCl). Its constituent particles are positively charged sodium ions (Na +) and negatively charged 3.3.2 MOLECULES OF COMPOUNDS Atoms of different elements join together in definite proportions to form molecules of compounds. Few examples are given in Table 3.4. Reprint 2025-26
3.3.1, MOLECULES OF ELEMENTS Table 3.4 : Molecules of some The molecules of an element are constituted compounds by the same type of atoms. Molecules of many Compound Combining Ratio elements, such as argon (Ar), helium (He) ete. Elements by are made up of only one atom of that element. Mass But this is not the case with most of the non- Water (HO) Hydrogen, Oxygen 1:8 metals. For example, a molecule of oxygen Ammonia (NH,) Nitrogen. Hydrogen 14:3 consists of two atoms of oxygen and hence it k d nolecule, O,. 163 CarPen is known as a diatomic molecule, O,. 3 dioxide (CO,) Carbon. Oxygen 3:8 atoms of oxygen unite into a molecule, instead of the usual 2, we get ozone, O,. The number . of atoms constituting a molecule is known as Activity 3 its atomicity. ¢ — Refer to Table 3.4 for ratio by mass of Metals and some other elements, such as atoms present in molecules and Table carbon, do not have a simple structure but 3.2 for atomic masses of elements. Find . . . the ratio by number of the atoms of consist of a very large and indefinite number 7. . elements in the molecules of of atoms bonded together. compounds given in Table 3.4. Let us look at the atomicity of some e = The ratio by number of atoms for a non-metals. water molecule can he found as follows: Element | Ratio |Atomic| Mass |Simplest Table 3.3 : Atomicity of some by | mass | ratio/| ratio elements mass | (u) [atomic mass Type of Name Atomicity oy = 1 Element. H 1 1 7 =] 2 Non-Metal Argon Monoatomic gol Helium Monoatomic ce) 8 16 iar l 6 Oxygen Diatomic drog . . ¢ ‘Thus, the ratio by number of atoms tor Hydrogen Diatomic water is HO = 2:1, Nitrogen Diatomic Chlorine Diatomic 3.3.3, WHAT IS AN ION? Phosphorus — Tetra-atomic Compounds composed of metals and non- Sulphur Poly-atomic metals contain charged species. The charged . species are known as fons. lons may consist of a single charged atom or a group of atoms that have a net charge on them. An ion can be negatively or positively charged. A negatively 3.3.2 MOLECULES OF COMPOUNDS charged ion is called an ‘anion’ and the Atoms of different elements join together positively charged ion, a ‘cation’. Take. for in definite proportions to form molecules example. sodium chloride (NaCl). Its of compounds. Few examples are given in constituent particles are positively charged Table 3.4. sodium ions (Na‘) and negatively charged Arous ann Motions 31 Reprint 2025-26