[Page 9]
SCIENCE34 3434 3434 2. Write down the names of compounds represented by the following formulae: (i) Al2(SO4)3 (ii) CaCl2 (iii) K2SO4 (iv) KNO3 (v) CaCO3. 3. What is meant by the term chemical formula? 4. How many atoms are present in a (i) H2S molecule and (ii) PO4 3– ion? 3.5 Molecular Mass In section 3.2.2 we discussed the concept of atomic mass. This concept can be extended to calculate molecular masses. The molecular mass of a substance is the sum of the atomic masses of all the atoms in a molecule of the substance. It is therefore the relative mass of a molecule expressed in atomic mass units (u). Example 3.1 Example 3.1 Example 3.1 Example 3.1 Example 3.1 (a) C alculate the relative molecular mass of water (H 2O). (b) Calculate the molecular mass of HNO3. Solution: Solution:Solution:Solution:Solution: (a) Atomic mass of hydrogen = 1u, oxygen = 16 u So the molecular mass of water, which contains two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen is = 2 ´ 1+ 1´16 = 18 u (b) The molecular mass of HNO 3 = the atomic mass of H + the atomic mass of N+ 3 ´ the atomic mass of O = 1 + 14 + 48 = 63 u 3.5.1 FORMULA UNIT MASS The formula unit mass of a substance is a sum of the atomic masses of all atoms in a formula unit of a compound. F ormula unit mass is calculated in the same manner as we calculate the molecular mass. The only difference is that (c) Formula of sodium nitrate: Formula : NaNO3 (d) Formula of calcium hydroxide: Formula : Ca(OH)2 Note that the formula of calcium hydroxide is Ca(OH)2 and not CaOH2. We use brackets when we have two or more of the same ions in the formula. Here, the bracket around OH with a subscript 2 indicates that there are two hydroxyl (OH) groups joined to one calcium atom. In other words, there are two atoms each of oxygen and hydrogen in calcium hydroxide. (e) Formula of sodium carbonate: Formula : Na2CO3 In the above example, brackets are not needed if there is only one ion present. (f) Formula of ammonium sulphate: Formula : (NH4)2SO4 Q uestions 1. Write down the formulae of (i) sodium oxide (ii) aluminium chloride (iii) sodium sulphide (iv) magnesium hydroxide Reprint 2025-26
¢) Formula of sodium nitrate: . J) 2. Write down the names of Symbol/ N: xo compounds represented by the Formula a _* following formulae: x fi) AL{SO.}, Charge 1+ 1- fi) CaCl, Fortnula : NaNO, (iii) K,SO, fii) KNO, (d) Fortnula of calcium hydroxide: i} Caco. 3. What is meant bv the term Symbol > ; : symnbot/ Ca OH chemical formula? x 1. How many atoms are present in a Charge 94 1- f) TLS molecule and Formula : Ca(OH), (ii) = PO, ior’? Note that the formula of caleium hydroxide is Ca(OH), and not CaQH,,. We use 3.5 Molecular Mass brackets when we have two or more of the In section 3.2.2 we discussed the concept of same ions in the formula. Here, the bracket atornic mass. This concept can be extended to around OH with a subscript 2 indicates that) caleulate molecular masses. The molecular there are two hydroxyl (OH) groups joined to mass ofa substance is the sum of the atomic one calcium atom, In other words, there are asses of all the atoms in a molecule of the two atoms each of oxygen and hydrogen in substance. It is therefore the relative tnass of calcium hydroxide. a molecule expressed in atomic mass units (ti). (e) Fortnula of sedium carbonate: TFT Example 3.1 (a) Calculate the relative prinbol/ Na CO, molecular mass of water (H,O). ormula x (b) Calculate the molecular mass of Charge 1+ 2- HNO,, Formula : Na,CO, Solution: In the above example, brackets are not needed (a) Atomic mass of hydrogen = lu, if there is only one ion present. oxygen = 16u So the molecular mass of water, which () Formula of ammonium sulphate: contains two atoms of hydrogen and one Formula NH, so, atom of oxygen is = 2x 1+ 1x16 = 18u Charge 14 2. (b) The molecular mass of HNO, = the FR la: (NH).SO atomic mass of H + the atomic mass of ormula : (NH,),SO, N+3x the atomic mass of O =1+14+48=63u j} || Westions 3.5.1 FORMULA UNIT MASS | I. wie down the lormulie of The formula unit mass ofa substance is a surn i" FUT ONTG ; loride of the atornic masses of all ators in a formula | | fit a vhuineulphide unit of a compound, Formula unit mass is oe (iii) sodium su pric ‘ dl calculated in the same manner as we calculate fi} magnesium hydroxide the molecular mass. The only difference is that 34 Some Reprint 2025-26

[Page 10]
ATOMS AND MOLECULES 35 What you have learnt • During a chemical reaction, the sum of the masses of the reactants and products remains unchanged. This is known as the Law of Conservation of Mass. • In a pure chemical compound, elements are always present in a definite proportion by mass. This is known as the Law of Definite Proportions. • An atom is the smallest particle of the element that cannot usually exist independently and retain all its chemical properties. • A molecule is the smallest particle of an element or a compound capable of independent existence under ordinary conditions. It shows all the properties of the substance. • A chemical formula of a compound shows its constituent elements and the number of atoms of each combining element. • Clusters of atoms that act as an ion are called polyatomic ions. They carry a fixed charge on them. • The chemical formula of a molecular compound is determined by the valency of each element. • In ionic compounds, the charge on each ion is used to determine the chemical formula of the compound. we use the word formula unit for those substances whose constituent particles are ions. For example, sodium chloride as discussed above, has a formula unit NaCl. Its formula unit mass can be calculated as– 1 × 23 + 1 × 35.5 = 58.5 u Example 3.2 Calculate the formula unit mass of CaCl2. Solution: Atomic mass of Ca + (2 × atomic mass of Cl) = 40 + 2 × 35.5 = 40 + 71 = 111 u Q uestions 1. Calculate the molecular masses of H2, O 2, Cl 2, CO 2, CH 4, C 2H6, C2H4, NH3, CH3OH. 2. Calculate the for mula unit masses of ZnO, Na2O, K2CO3, given atomic masses of Zn = 65 u, Na = 23 u, K = 39 u, C = 12 u, and O = 16 u. Reprint 2025-26
we use the word formula unit for those uestious substances whose constituent particles are (" i , ions. For example. sodium chloride as | | 2. Calculate the molecular masses discussed above, has a formula unit NaCl. Its of H, O, Cl, CO, CH. CHL, formula unit mass can be calculated as- CHL NH CH OH. : 1x 23+1%*35.5=58.5u | 2 Calculate the formula unit a | masses of Z2O. Na O. KCO., Example 3.2 Calculate the formula unit U given atomic masses of Zt — 65.11, mass of CaCl. Na- 28u, 8 -89u, C= 124, Solution: and O- 16. Atomic mass of Ca + (2 x atomic mass of Cl) =404+2x« 35.5=40+71=11lu What . IE you have > RG BRS Ay pe ae learnt —_ . ° During a chemical reaction, the sum of the masses of the reactants and products remains unchanged. This is known as the Law of Conservation of Mass. ° In a pure chemical compound, clements are always present in a definite proportion by mass. This is known as the Law of Definite Proportions. ° An atom is the smallest particle of the element that cannot usually exist independently and retain all its chemical properties. ° A molecule is the smallest particle of an element or a compound capable of independent existence under ordinary conditions. It shows all the properties of the substance. ° A chemical formula of a compound shows its constituent elements and the number of atoms of each combining element. ° Clusters of atoms that act as an ion are called polyatomic ions. They carry a fixed charge on them. ° The chemical formula of a molecular compound is determined by the valency of cach element. ° In ionic compounds, the charge on cach ion is used to determine the chemical formula of the compound. Arous ann Motions 35 Reprint 2025-26

[Page 11]
SCIENCE36 Group Activity Play a game for writing formulae. Example1 : Make placards with symbols and valencies of the elements separately. Each student should hold two placards, one with the symbol in the right hand and the other with the valency in the left hand. Keeping the symbols in place, students should criss-cross their valencies to form the formula of a compound. Exercises 1. A 0.24 g sample of compound of oxygen and boron was found by analysis to contain 0.096 g of boron and 0.144 g of oxygen. Calculate the percentage composition of the compound by weight. 2. When 3.0 g of carbon is burnt in 8.00 g oxygen, 11.00 g of carbon dioxide is produced. What mass of carbon dioxide will be formed when 3.00 g of carbon is burnt in 50.00 g of oxygen? Which law of chemical combination will govern your answer? 3. What are polyatomic ions? Give examples. 4. Write the chemical for mulae of the following. (a) Magnesium chloride (b) Calcium oxide (c) Copper nitrate (d) Aluminium chloride (e) Calcium carbonate. 5. Give the names of the elements present in the following compounds. (a) Quick lime (b) Hydrogen bromide (c) Baking powder (d) Potassium sulphate. 6. Calculate the molar mass of the following substances. (a) Ethyne, C 2H2 (b) Sulphur molecule, S8 (c) Phosphorus molecule, P 4 (Atomic mass of phosphorus = 31) (d) Hydrochloric acid, HCl (e) Nitric acid, HNO 3 Reprint 2025-26
| ____)s Exercises _? 1. AOQ.24 g sample of compound of oxygen and boron was found T. by analysis to contain 0.096 g of boron and 0.144 g of oxygen. | — Caleulate the percentage composition of the compound by ay weight. Sd 2. When 3.0 g of carbon is burnt in 8.00 g oxygen, 11.00 g of carbon dioxide is produced. What mass of carbon dioxide will be formed when 3.00 g of carbon is burnt in 50.00 g of oxygen? Which law of chemical combination will govern your answer? 3. What are polyatomic ions? Give examples. 4. Write the chemical formulae of the following. (a) Magnesium chloride (b) Calcium oxide (ec) Copper nitrate (d) Aluminium chloride (ce) Caleium carbonate. 5. Give the names of the elements present in the following compounds. (a) Quick lime (b) Hydrogen bromide (ce) Baking powder (d) Potassium sulphate. 6. Calculate the molar mass of the following substances. (a) Ethyne, C,H, (b) Sulphur molecule, S, (c) Phosphorus molecule, P, (Atomic mass of phosphorus = 31) (d) Hydrochloric acid, HCl (ec) Nitric acid, HNO, [) Group Activity Ps ; RK Play a game for writing formulac. Sick N Example! : Make placards with symbols and valencies of the ve eS. elements separately. Each student should hold two \ SRS placards, one with the symbol in the right hand and Wee meee the other with the valency in the left hand. Keeping the symbols in place, students should criss-cross their valencies to form the formula of a compound. 36 Sewxer, : Reprint 2025-26

[Page 12]
ATOMS AND MOLECULES 37 3737 3737 Formula for sodium sulphate: 2 sodium ions can be fixed on one sulphate ion. Hence, the formula will be: Na 2SO4 Do it yourself : Now, write the formula of sodium phosphate. Example 2 :Example 2 :Example 2 :Example 2 :Example 2 : A low cost model for writing formulae: Take empty blister packs of medicines. Cut them in gr oups, according to the valency of the element, as shown in the figure. Now, you can make formulae by fixing one type of ion into other . For example:For example:For example:For example:For example: Na+ SO 4 2- PO 4 3- Reprint 2025-26
Example 2 : A low cost model for writing formulae: Take empty blister packs of medicines. Cut them in groups, according to the valency of the clement, as shown in the figure. Now, you can make formulae by fixing one type of ion into other. For example: Na* SO,’ PO, —JS WL —FLF UL —JS LILI LU Formula for sodium sulphate: 2 sodium ions can be fixed on one sulphate ion. Hence, the formula will be: Na,SO, Do it yourself : Now, write the formula of sodium phosphate. Aros ano Moreccs 37 Reprint 2025-26