[Page 7]
SCIENCE32 chloride ions (Cl–). A group of atoms carrying a charge is known as a polyatomic ion (Table 3.6). We shall learn more about the formation of ions in Chapter 4. learn the symbols and combining capacity of the elements. The combining power (or capacity) of an element is known as its valency. Valency can be used to find out how the atoms of an element will combine with the atom(s) of another element to form a chemical compound. The valency of the atom of an element can be thought of as hands or arms of that atom. Human beings have two arms and an octopus has eight. If one octopus has to catch hold of a few people in such a manner that all the eight arms of the octopus and both arms of all the humans are locked, how many humans do you think the octopus can hold? Represent the octopus with O and humans with H. Can you write a formula for this combination? Do you get OH4 as the formula? The subscript 4 indicates the number of humans held by the octopus. The valencies of some common ions are given in Table 3.6. We will learn more about valency in the next chapter. * Some elements show more than one valency. A Roman numeral shows their valency in a bracket. Table 3.5: Some ionic compounds Ionic Constituting Ratio Compound Elements by Mass Calcium oxide Calcium and oxygen 5:2 Magnesium Magnesium sulphide and sulphur 3:4 Sodium Sodium chloride and chlorine 23:35.5 3.4 Writing Chemical Formulae The chemical formula of a compound is a symbolic representation of its composition. The chemical formulae of different compounds can be written easily. For this exercise, we need to Table 3.6: Names and symbols of some ions Vale- Name of Symbol Non- Symbol Polyatomic Symbol ncy ion metallic ions element 1. Sodium Na+ Hydrogen H+ Ammonium NH4 + Potassium K+ Hydride H- Hydroxide OH– Silver Ag+ Chloride Cl- Nitrate NO3 – Copper (I)* Cu+ Bromide Br- Hydrogen Iodide I– carbonate HCO3 – 2. Magnesium Mg2+ Oxide O2- Carbonate CO3 2– Calcium Ca2+ Sulphide S2- Sulphite SO3 2– Zinc Zn2+ Sulphate SO4 2– Iron (II)* Fe2+ Copper (II)* Cu2+ 3. Aluminium Al3+ Nitride N3- Phosphate PO4 3– Iron (III)* Fe3+ Reprint 2025-26
chloride ions (Cl). A group of atoms carrying — learn the symbols and combining capacity of a charge is Known as a polyatomic ion (Table the elements. 3.6). We shall learn more about the formation The combining power (or capacity) of an of fons in Chapter 4. element is known as its valency. Valency can be used to find out how the atoms of an Table 3.5: Some ionic compounds . element will combine with the atom{(s) of Ionic Constituting | Ratio another element to form a chemical compound. Compound Elements by The valency of the atom of an element can be Mass thought of as hands or arms of that atom. Calcium oxide = Calcium and Human beings have two arms and an oxygen 5:2 octopus has eight. Ifone octopus has to catch Magnesium Magnesium hold of a few people in such a manner that all the eight arms of the octopus and both arms sulphide and sulphur 3:4 . of all the humans are locked, how many Sodium Sodium humans do you think the octopus can hold? chloride and chlorine 23:35.5 Represent the octopus with © and humans with H. Can you write a formula for this we . combination? Do you get OI,as the formula? 3.4 Writing Chemical Formulae The subscript 4 indicates the number of The chemical formula of a compound is a humans held by the octopus. symbolic representation of its composition. The The valencies of some common ions are chemical formulae of different compounds can given in Table 3.6. We will learn more about be written easily. For this exercise, we need to valency in the next chapter. Table 3.6: Names and symbols of some ions Vale- Name of Symbol Non- Symbol Polyatomic Symbol ney ion metallic ions element 1. Sodium Na’ Hydrogen H- Ammonium NH: Potassium K: Hydride HW Hydroxide OH Silver Ag Chloride cr Nitrate NO, Copper (I)* Cur Bromide Br Hydrogen lodide I- carbonate HCO; 2. Magnesium Mg?* Oxide oO Carbonate CO," Calcium Ca” Sulphide Ss? Sulphite so Zine zn?* Sulphate so,” Iron (II)* Fe?* Copper (I]* Cu** 3. Aluminium Al* Nitride N* Phosphate PO,” Iron (IID* Fe* “Some clements show more than one valency. A Roman mumeral shows their valency in a bracket, 32 Sewence Reprint 2025-26

[Page 8]
ATOMS AND MOLECULES 33 3. Formula of carbon tetrachloride For magnesium chloride, we write the symbol of cation (Mg 2+) first followed by the symbol of anion (Cl-). Then their charges are criss-crossed to get the formula. 4. Formula of magnesium chloride Formula : MgCl2 Thus, in magnesium chloride, ther e are two chloride ions (Cl -) for each magnesium ion (Mg2+). The positive and negative charges must balance each other and the overall structure must be neutral. Note that in the formula, the charges on the ions are not indicated. Some more examples (a) Formula for aluminium oxide: Formula : Al2O3 (b) Formula for calcium oxide: Here, the valencies of the two elements are the same. You may arrive at the formula Ca2O2. But we simplify the formula as CaO. The rules that you have to follow while writing a chemical formula are as follows: • the valencies or charges on the ion must balance. • when a compound consists of a metal and a non-metal, the name or symbol of the metal is written first. For example: calcium oxide (CaO), sodium chloride (NaCl), iron sulphide (FeS), copper oxide (CuO), etc., where oxygen, chlorine, sulphur are non- metals and are written on the right, whereas calcium, sodium, iron and copper are metals, and are written on the left. • in compounds formed with polyatomic ions, the number of ions present in the compound is indicated by enclosing the formula of ion in a bracket and writing the number of ions outside the bracket. For example, Mg (OH)2. In case the number of polyatomic ion is one, the bracket is not required. For example, NaOH. 3.4.1 FORMULAE OF SIMPLE COMPOUNDS The simplest compounds, which are made up of two different elements are called binary compounds. Valencies of some ions are given in T able 3.6. Y ou can use these to write formulae for compounds. While writing the chemical formulae for compounds, we write the constituent elements and their valencies as shown below. Then we must crossover the valencies of the combining atoms. Examples 1. Formula of hydrogen chloride Formula of the compound would be HCl. 2. Formula of hydrogen sulphide Reprint 2025-26
The rules that you have to follow while writing 3. Formula of carbon tetrachloride a chemical formula are as follows: e the valencies or charges on the ion Symbol C Cl must balance. . e = when a compound consists of a metal and Valency DX 1 a non-metal, the name or symbol of the ° metal is written first. For example: calcium Formula : CCl, oxide (CaQ)., sodium chloride (NaCl). iron sulphide (FeS). copper oxide (CuQ), etc.. where oxygen. chlorine, sulphur are non- For magnesium chloride, we write the metals and are written on the right. symbol of cation (Mg”) first followed by the whereas calcium, sodium, iron and symbol of anion (Cl). Then their charges are copper are metals, and are written on hice crossed to get the formula. the left. 7 e = incompounds formed with polyatomic ions, 4. Formula of magnesium chloride the number of ions present in the compound is indicated by enclosing the Syinbol Mg Cl formula of ion ina bracket and writing the x number of ions outside the bracket. For Charge 2+ l- example, Mg (OH),. In case the number of . polyatomic ion is one, the bracket is not Formula : MgCl, required. For example, NaOH. 3.4.1 FORMULAE OF SIMPLE COMPOUNDS Thus, in magnesium chloride, there are two chloride ions (Cl) for each magnesium The simplest compounds, which are made up ion (Mg”). The positive and negative charges of two different elements are called binary must balance each other and the overall compounds. Valencies of some ions are given structure must be neutral. Note that in the in Table 3.6. You can use these to write | . “ . formulae for compounds. formula, the charges on the ions are While writing the chemical formulae for [0t indicated. compounds, we write the constituent elements and their valencies as shown below. Then we — Some more examples must crossover the valencies of the (a) Formula for aluminium oxide: combining atoms. Symbol al ) Examples x Charge 3+ 2- 1, Formula of hydrogen chloride Symbol H cl Formula : ALO. Valency OX 1 (b) Formula for calcium oxide: Formula of the compound would be HCL Symbol Ca fe) 2. Formula of hydrogen sulphide x : Charge 2+ 2- Symbol H S$ x Here, the valencies of the two elements Valency 1 2 are the same. You may arrive at the formula Formula : H,S Ca,O,. But we simplify the formula as CaO. Arous ann Motions 33 Reprint 2025-26 :