[Page 5]
SCIENCE18 18181818 Q • Colloids are big enough to scatter a beam of light passing through it and make its path visible. • They do not settle down when left undisturbed, that is, a colloid is quite stable. • They cannot be separated from the mixture by the process of filtration. But, a special technique of separation known as centrifugation can be used to separate the colloidal particles. The components of a colloidal solution are the dispersed phase and the dispersion medium. The solute-like component or the dispersed particles in a colloid form the dispersed phase, and the component in which the dispersed phase is suspended is known as the dispersing medium. Colloids are classified according to the state (solid, liquid or gas) of the dispersing medium and the dispersed phase. A few common examples are given in Table 2.1. From this table you can see that they are very common everyday life. Tyndall effect can be observed when sunlight passes through the canopy of a dense forest. In the forest, mist contains tiny droplets of water , which act as particles of colloid dispersed in air. Fig. 2.4: Fig. 2.4:Fig. 2.4: Fig. 2.4:Fig. 2.4: The Tyndall effect uestions 1. Differentiate between homogeneous and heterogeneous mixtures with examples. 2. How are sol, solution and suspension different from each other? 3. To make a saturated solution, 36 g of sodium chloride is dissolved in 100 g of water at 293 K. Find its concentration at this temperature. Properties of a ColloidProperties of a ColloidProperties of a ColloidProperties of a ColloidProperties of a Colloid • A colloid is a heterogeneous mixture. • The size of particles of a colloid is too small to be individually seen with naked eyes. Table 2.1: Common examples of colloidsTable 2.1: Common examples of colloidsTable 2.1: Common examples of colloidsTable 2.1: Common examples of colloidsTable 2.1: Common examples of colloids DispersedDispersedDispersedDispersedDispersed DispersingDispersingDispersingDispersingDispersing Type TypeTypeTypeType Example ExampleExample ExampleExample phase phasephase phasephase Medium MediumMedium MediumMedium Liquid Gas Aerosol Fog, clouds, mist Solid Gas Aerosol Smoke, automobile exhaust Gas Liquid Foam Shaving cream Liquid Liquid Emulsion Milk, face cream Solid Liquid Sol Milk of magnesia, mud Gas Solid Foam Foam, rubber, sponge, pumice Liquid Solid Gel Jelly, cheese, butter Solid Solid Solid Sol Coloured gemstone, milky glass

[Page 6]
IS MATTER AROUND US PURE? 19 2.3 Physical and Chemical Changes In the previous chapter, we have learnt about a few physical properties of matter . The properties that can be observed and specified like colour , har dness, rigidity, fluidity, density, melting point, boiling point etc. are the physical properites. The interconversion of states is a physical change because these changes occur without a change in composition and no change in the chemical nature of the substance. Although ice, water and water vapour all look different and display different physical properties, they are chemically the same. Both water and cooking oil are liquid but their chemical characteristics are different. They differ in odour and inflammability. We know that oil burns in air whereas water extinguishes fire. It is this chemical property of oil that makes it different fr om water . Burning is a chemical change. During this process one substance reacts with another to undergo a change in chemical composition. Chemical change brings change in the chemical properties of matter and we get new substances. A chemical change is also called a chemical reaction. During burning of a candle, both physical and chemical changes take place. Can you distinguish these? uestions 1. Classify the following as chemical or physical changes: • cutting of trees, • melting of butter in a pan, • rusting of almirah, • boiling of water to form steam, • passing of electric current, through water and the water breaking down into hydrogen and oxygen gases, • dissolving common salt in water, • making a fruit salad with raw fruits, and Q • burning of paper and wood. 2. Try segr egating the things around you as pure substances or mixtures. 2.4 What are the Types of Pure Substances? On the basis of their chemical composition, substances can be classified either as elements or compounds. 2.4.1 ELEMENTS Robert Boyle was the first scientist to use the term element in 1661. Antoine Laurent Lavoisier (1743–94), a French chemist, was the first to establish an experimentally useful definition of an element. He defined an element as a basic form of matter that cannot be broken down into simpler substances by chemical reactions. Elements can be normally divided into metals, non-metals and metalloids. Metals usually show some or all of the following properties: • They have a lustre (shine). • They have silvery-grey or golden-yellow colour. • They conduct heat and electricity. • They are ductile (can be drawn into wires). • They are malleable (can be hammered into thin sheets). • They are sonorous (make a ringing sound when hit). Examples of metals ar e gold, silver , copper, iron, sodium, potassium etc. Mercury is the only metal that is liquid at room temperature. Non-metals usually show some or all of the following properties: • They display a variety of colours. • They are poor conductors of heat and electricity. • They are not lustrous, sonorous or malleable. Examples of non-metals are hydrogen, oxygen, iodine, carbon (coal, coke), bromine,

[Page 7]
SCIENCE20 chlorine etc. Some elements have intermediate properties between those of metals and non- metals, they are called metalloids; examples are boron, silicon, germanium, etc. More to know 2.4.2 COMPOUNDS A compound is a substance composed of two or more elements, chemically combined with one another in a fixed proportion. What do we get when two or more elements are combined? Activity 2.4 • Divide the class into two groups. Give 5 g of iron filings and 3 g of sulphur powder in a china dish to both the groups. Group I • Mix and crush iron filings and sulphur powder . Group II • Mix and crush iron filings and sulphur powder . Heat this mixtur e strongly till red hot. Remove from flame and let the mixture cool. Groups I and II • Check for magnetism in the material obtained. Bring a magnet near the material and check if the material is attracted towards the magnet. • Compare the texture and colour of the material obtained by the groups. • Add carbon disulphide to one part of the material obtained. Stir well and filter. • Add dilute sulphuric acid or dilute hydrochloric acid to the other part of the material obtained. (Note: teacher supervision is necessary for this activity). • Perform all the above steps with both the elements (iron and sulphur) separately. Now answer • Did the material obtained by the two groups look the same? • Which group has obtained a material with magnetic properties? • Can we separate the components of the material obtained? • On adding dilute sulphuric acid or dilute hydrochloric acid, did both the groups obtain a gas? Did the gas in both the cases smell the same or different? The gas obtained by Group I is hydrogen, it is colourless, odourless and combustible– it is not advised to do the combustion test for hydrogen in the class. The gas obtained by Group II is hydrogen sulphide. It is a colourless gas with the smell of rotten eggs. You must have observed that the products obtained by both the groups show different properties, though the starting materials were the same. Group I has carried out the activity involving a physical change whereas in case of Group II, a chemical change (a chemical reaction) has taken place. • The material obtained by group I is a mixture of the two substances. The substances given are the elements—iron and sulphur. • The properties of the mixture are the same as that of its constituents. • The number of elements known at present are more than 100. Ninety-two elements are naturally occurring and the rest are man-made. • Majority of the elements are solid. • Eleven elements are in gaseous state at room temperature. • Two elements are liquid at room temperature—mercury and bromine. • Elements, gallium and cesium become liquid at a temperature slightly above room temperature (303 K).

[Page 8]
IS MATTER AROUND US PURE? 21 • The material obtained by group II is a compound. • On heating the two elements strongly we get a compound, which has totally different properties compared to the combining elements. • The composition of a compound is the same throughout. We can also observe that the texture and the colour of the compound are the same throughout. Thus, we can summarise the physical and chemical nature of matter in the following graphical organiser: Table 2.2: Mixtures and Compounds Mixtures Compounds 1. Elements or compounds just mix 1. Elements react to form new compounds. together to form a mixture and no new compound is formed. 2. A mixture has a variable composition. 2. The composition of each new substance is always fixed. 3, A mixture shows the properties of the 3. The new substance has totally different constituent substances. properties. 4. The constituents can be seperated 4. The constituents can be separated only fairly easily by physical methods. by chemical or electrochemical reactions. What you have learnt • A mixture contains more than one substance (element and/ or compound) mixed in any proportion.

[Page 9]
SCIENCE22 Exercises 1. Which separation techniques will you apply for the separation of the following? (a) Sodium chloride from its solution in water (b) Ammonium chloride from a mixture containing sodium chloride and ammonium chloride (c) Small pieces of metal in the engine oil of a car (d) Different pigments from an extract of flower petals (e) Butter from curd (f) Oil from water (g) Tea leaves from tea (h) Iron pins from sand (i) Wheat grains from husk (j) Fine mud particles suspended in water • Mixtures can be separated into pure substances using appropriate separation techniques. • A solution is a homogeneous mixture of two or more substances. The major component of a solution is called the solvent, and the minor , the solute. • The concentration of a solution is the amount of solute present per unit volume or per unit mass of the solution. • Materials that are insoluble in a solvent and have particles that are visible to naked eyes, form a suspension. A suspension is a heterogeneous mixture. • Colloids are heterogeneous mixtures in which the particle size is too small to be seen with the naked eye, but is big enough to scatter light. Colloids are useful in industry and daily life. The particles are called the dispersed phase and the medium in which they are distributed is called the dispersion medium. • Pure substances can be elements or compounds. An element is a form of matter that cannot be broken down by chemical reactions into simpler substances. A compound is a substance composed of two or more different types of elements, chemically combined in a fixed proportion. • Properties of a compound are different from its constituent elements, whereas a mixture shows the properties of its constituting elements or compounds.