[Page 5]
SCIENCE18 18181818 Q • Colloids are big enough to scatter a beam of light passing through it and make its path visible. • They do not settle down when left undisturbed, that is, a colloid is quite stable. • They cannot be separated from the mixture by the process of filtration. But, a special technique of separation known as centrifugation can be used to separate the colloidal particles. The components of a colloidal solution are the dispersed phase and the dispersion medium. The solute-like component or the dispersed particles in a colloid form the dispersed phase, and the component in which the dispersed phase is suspended is known as the dispersing medium. Colloids are classified according to the state (solid, liquid or gas) of the dispersing medium and the dispersed phase. A few common examples are given in Table 2.1. From this table you can see that they are very common everyday life. Tyndall effect can be observed when sunlight passes through the canopy of a dense forest. In the forest, mist contains tiny droplets of water , which act as particles of colloid dispersed in air. Fig. 2.4: Fig. 2.4:Fig. 2.4: Fig. 2.4:Fig. 2.4: The Tyndall effect uestions 1. Differentiate between homogeneous and heterogeneous mixtures with examples. 2. How are sol, solution and suspension different from each other? 3. To make a saturated solution, 36 g of sodium chloride is dissolved in 100 g of water at 293 K. Find its concentration at this temperature. Properties of a ColloidProperties of a ColloidProperties of a ColloidProperties of a ColloidProperties of a Colloid • A colloid is a heterogeneous mixture. • The size of particles of a colloid is too small to be individually seen with naked eyes. Table 2.1: Common examples of colloidsTable 2.1: Common examples of colloidsTable 2.1: Common examples of colloidsTable 2.1: Common examples of colloidsTable 2.1: Common examples of colloids DispersedDispersedDispersedDispersedDispersed DispersingDispersingDispersingDispersingDispersing Type TypeTypeTypeType Example ExampleExample ExampleExample phase phasephase phasephase Medium MediumMedium MediumMedium Liquid Gas Aerosol Fog, clouds, mist Solid Gas Aerosol Smoke, automobile exhaust Gas Liquid Foam Shaving cream Liquid Liquid Emulsion Milk, face cream Solid Liquid Sol Milk of magnesia, mud Gas Solid Foam Foam, rubber, sponge, pumice Liquid Solid Gel Jelly, cheese, butter Solid Solid Solid Sol Coloured gemstone, milky glass Reprint 2025-26
Tyndall effect can be observed when e Colloids are big enough to scatter a sunlight passes through the canopy ofa dense beam of light passing through it and forest. In the forest, mist contains tiny droplets make its path visible. of water, which act as particles of colloid e They do not settle down when left dispersed in air. undisturbed, that is, a colloid is quite — -; , stable. a, it. a an e They cannot be separated from the iP 3 2 8 4 — j mixture by the process of filtration. But, on ad ic aad ~ a special technique of separation known ° f my tl as centrifugation can be used to i i) i separate the colloidal particles. |, . 4 i, | i The components of a colloidal solution are ms 43 : the dispersed phase and the dispersion «~-£ uns medium. The solute-like component or the a" ® ed dispersed particles in a colloid form the : . dispersed phase, and the component in which the dispersed phase is suspended is known Fig. 2.4: The Tyndall etfect as the dispersing medium. Colloids are classified according to the state (solid. liquid Properties of a Colloid or gas) of the dispersing medium and the ¢ Acolloid is a heterogeneous mixture. dispersed phase. A few common examples are ¢ The size of particles of a colloid is too — given in Table 2.1. From this table you can small to be individually seen with — see that they are very common everyday life. naked eyes. N) westions \ 1. Ditterentiate bewwcen homogencous and heterogencous NuXQires WIC CXaimpics, 2. Howare sol, solution and suspension dittercnt trom cach other? OO Toanake a saturated solution. 36 g of sodiunt chloride is dissolved in LOO g of water | | al 203K. Find its concentration at this temperance, w) Table 2.1: Common examples of colloids Dispersed Dispersing Type Example phase Medium Liquid Gas Aerosol Fog, clouds, mist Solid Gas Aerosol Smoke, automobile exhaust Gas Liquid Foam Shaving cream Liquid Liquid Emulsion Milk, face cream Solid Liquid Sol Milk of magnesia, mud Gas Solid Foam Foam, rubber, sponge. pumice Liquid Solid Gel Jelly, cheese, butter Solid Solid Solid Sol Coloured gemstone. milky glass 18 Sewxce Reprint 2025-26

[Page 6]
IS MATTER AROUND US PURE? 19 2.3 Physical and Chemical Changes In the previous chapter, we have learnt about a few physical properties of matter . The properties that can be observed and specified like colour , har dness, rigidity, fluidity, density, melting point, boiling point etc. are the physical properites. The interconversion of states is a physical change because these changes occur without a change in composition and no change in the chemical nature of the substance. Although ice, water and water vapour all look different and display different physical properties, they are chemically the same. Both water and cooking oil are liquid but their chemical characteristics are different. They differ in odour and inflammability. We know that oil burns in air whereas water extinguishes fire. It is this chemical property of oil that makes it dif ferent fr om water . Burning is a chemical change. During this process one substance reacts with another to undergo a change in chemical composition. Chemical change brings change in the chemical properties of matter and we get new substances. A chemical change is also called a chemical reaction. During burning of a candle, both physical and chemical changes take place. Can you distinguish these? uestions 1. Classify the following as chemical or physical changes: • cutting of trees, • melting of butter in a pan, • rusting of almirah, • boiling of water to form steam, • passing of electric current, through water and the water breaking down into hydrogen and oxygen gases, • dissolving common salt in water, • making a fruit salad with raw fruits, and Q • burning of paper and wood. 2. Try segr egating the things around you as pure substances or mixtures. 2.4 What are the Types of Pure Substances? On the basis of their chemical composition, substances can be classified either as elements or compounds. 2.4.1 ELEMENTS Robert Boyle was the first scientist to use the term element in 1661. Antoine Laurent Lavoisier (1743–94), a French chemist, was the first to establish an experimentally useful definition of an element. He defined an element as a basic form of matter that cannot be broken down into simpler substances by chemical reactions. Elements can be normally divided into metals, non-metals and metalloids. Metals usually show some or all of the following properties: • They have a lustre (shine). • They have silvery-grey or golden-yellow colour. • They conduct heat and electricity. • They are ductile (can be drawn into wires). • They are malleable (can be hammered into thin sheets). • They are sonorous (make a ringing sound when hit). Examples of metals ar e gold, silver , copper, iron, sodium, potassium etc. Mercury is the only metal that is liquid at room temperature. Non-metals usually show some or all of the following properties: • They display a variety of colours. • They are poor conductors of heat and electricity. • They are not lustrous, sonorous or malleable. Examples of non-metals are hydrogen, oxygen, iodine, carbon (coal, coke), bromine, Reprint 2025-26
2.3 Physical and Chemical ¢ burning of paper and wood. 2 Trv segregating the things Changes around Vou as pure substances OT MNOS, In the previous chapter, we have learnt about a few physical properties of matter. The properties that can he observed and specified 2.4 What are the Types of Pure like colour, hardness, rigidity, fluidity. Substances? density, melting point, boiling point etc. are the physical properites. On the basis of their chemical composition, The interconversion of states isa physical — substances can be classified either as elements change because these changes occur without — or compounds. a change in composition and no change in the chemical nature of the substance. Although — 2.4.1 ELEMENTS ice, water and water vapour all look different and display different physical properties. they Robert Boyle was the first scientist to use the are chemically the same. term element in 1661. Antoine Laurent Both water and cooking oil are liquid but Lavoisier (1743-94), a French chemist, was the their chemical characteristics are different, f{ifst_ to establish an experimentally useful They differ in odour and inflammability. We _“(efinition ofan element. He defined an element know that oil burns in air whereas water 48a basic form of matter that cannot be broken extinguishes fire. It is this chemical property down into simpler substances by chemical of oil that makes it different from water. reactions. Burning is a chemical change. During this Elements can be normally divided into process one substance reacts with anotherto metals, non-metals and metalloids. undergo a change in chemical composition. Metals usually show some or all of the Chemical change brings change in the following properties: chemical properties of matter and we get new * They have a lustre (shine). substances. A chemical change is also called ° They have silvery-grey or golden-yellow a chemical reaction. colour. During burning of a candle, both physical * They conduct heat and electricity. and chemical changes take place. Can you * They are ductile (can be drawn into distinguish these? wires). * They are malleable (can be hammered : into thin sheets). M vestians * They are sonorous (make a ringing L. Classity the following as chemical - sound when hit). or physical changes: Examples of metals are gold. silver, © cutting of trees, copper. iron, sodium, potassium etc, Mercury | . melting of butter ina pan, is the only metal that is liquid at room iw) eo rusting ofalnirah, temperature. ¢ boiling of water to form steann. Non-metals usually show some or all of the ¢ passing of clectric current, following properties: through water and the water * They display a variety of colours. breaking down into hydrogen ° They are poor conductors of heat and and OXVECN 2ascs, electricity. e dissolving conmion salt in ° They are not lustrous. sonorous WoHlen, or malleable. e making a fruit salad with raw Examples of non-metals are hydrogen, fruits. and oxygen, iodine, carbon (coal. coke), bromine, Is Marten Arotan Us Pt xe? 19 Reprint 2025-26 :