[Page 9]
SCIENCE22 Exercises 1. Which separation techniques will you apply for the separation of the following? (a) Sodium chloride from its solution in water (b) Ammonium chloride from a mixture containing sodium chloride and ammonium chloride (c) Small pieces of metal in the engine oil of a car (d) Different pigments from an extract of flower petals (e) Butter from curd (f) Oil from water (g) Tea leaves from tea (h) Iron pins from sand (i) Wheat grains from husk (j) Fine mud particles suspended in water • Mixtures can be separated into pure substances using appropriate separation techniques. • A solution is a homogeneous mixture of two or more substances. The major component of a solution is called the solvent, and the minor , the solute. • The concentration of a solution is the amount of solute present per unit volume or per unit mass of the solution. • Materials that are insoluble in a solvent and have particles that are visible to naked eyes, form a suspension. A suspension is a heterogeneous mixture. • Colloids are heterogeneous mixtures in which the particle size is too small to be seen with the naked eye, but is big enough to scatter light. Colloids are useful in industry and daily life. The particles are called the dispersed phase and the medium in which they are distributed is called the dispersion medium. • Pure substances can be elements or compounds. An element is a form of matter that cannot be broken down by chemical reactions into simpler substances. A compound is a substance composed of two or more different types of elements, chemically combined in a fixed proportion. • Properties of a compound are different from its constituent elements, whereas a mixture shows the properties of its constituting elements or compounds. Reprint 2025-26
° Mixtures can be separated into pure substances using appropriate separation techniques. ° A solution is a homogeneous mixture of two or more substanees. The major component of a solution is called the solvent, and the minor, the solute. ° The concentration of a solution is the amount of solute present per unit volume or per unit mass of the solution. ° Materials that are insoluble in a solvent and have particles that are visible to naked eyes, form a suspension. A suspension is a heterogeneous mixture. ° Colloids are heterogeneous mixtures in which the particle size is too small to be seen with the naked eye, but is big enough to scatter light. Colloids are useful in industry and daily life. The particles are called the dispersed phase and the medium in which they are distributed is called the dispersion medium. ° Pure substances can be elements or compounds. An element is a form of matter that cannot be broken down by chemical reactions into simpler substances. A compound is a substance composed of two or more different types of elements, chemically combined in a fixed proportion. ° Properties of a compound are different from its constituent elements, whereas a mixture shows the properties of its constituting elements or compounds. [LT i Exercises oy & 1. Which separation techniques will you apply for the separation 4 of the following? A ~y (a) Sodium chloride from its solution in water [> = (b) Ammonium chloride from a mixture containing sodium chloride and ammonium chloride (ce) Small pieces of metal in the engine oil of a car (d) Different pigments from an extract of flower petals (e) Butter from curd (f) Oil from water (g) Tea leaves from tea (h) Iron pins from sand () Wheat grains from husk () Fine mud particles suspended in water 22 Sexes Reprint 2025-26

[Page 10]
IS MATTER AROUND US PURE? 23 (a) What mass of potassium nitrate would be needed to produce a saturated solution of potassium nitrate in 50 grams of water at 313 K? (b) Pragya makes a saturated solution of potassium chloride in water at 353 K and leaves the solution to cool at room temperature. What would she observe as the solution cools? Explain. (c) Find the solubility of each salt at 293 K. Which salt has the highest solubility at this temperature? (d) What is the effect of change of temperature on the solubility of a salt? 4. Explain the following giving examples. (a) Saturated solution (b) Pure substance (c) Colloid (d) Suspension 5. Classify each of the following as a homogeneous or heterogeneous mixture. soda water, wood, air, soil, vinegar, filtered tea. 6. How would you confirm that a colourless liquid given to you is pure water? 2. Write the steps you would use for making tea. Use the wor ds solution, solvent, solute, dissolve, soluble, insoluble, filtrate and residue. 3. Pragya tested the solubility of three different substances at different temperatures and collected the data as given below (results are given in the following table, as grams of substance dissolved in 100 grams of water to form a saturated solution). Substance Dissolved Temperature in K 283 293 313 333 353 Solubility Potassium nitrate 21 32 62 106 167 Sodium chloride 36 36 36 37 37 Potassium chloride 35 35 40 46 54 Ammonium chloride 24 37 41 55 66 Reprint 2025-26
2. Write the steps you would use for making tea. Use the words solution, solvent, solute, dissolve, soluble, insoluble, filtrate and residue. 3. Pragya tested the solubility of three different substances at different temperatures and collected the data as given below (results are given in the following table, as grams of substance dissolved in 100 grams of water to form a saturated solution). Substance Dissolved Temperature in K 283 293 313 333, 353 Solubility Potassium nitrate 21 32 62 106 167 Sodium chloride 36 36 36 37 37 Potassium chloride 35 35 40 46 54 Ammonium chloride 24 37 41 55 66 (a) What mass of potassium nitrate would be needed to produce a saturated solution of potassium nitrate in 50 grams of water at 313 K? (b) Pragya makes a saturated solution of potassium chloride in water at 353 K and leaves the solution to cool at room temperature. What would she observe as the solution cools? Explain. (ce) Find the solubility of each salt at 293 K. Which salt has the highest solubility at this temperature’? (dq) What is the effect of change of temperature on the solubility of a salt? 4. Explain the following giving examples. (a) Saturated solution (b) Pure substance (ec) Colloid (d) Suspension 5. Classify each of the following as a homogencous or heterogeneous mixture. soda water, wood, air, soil, vinegar, filtered tea. 6. How would you confirm that a colourless liquid given to you is pure water? Is Marree Axooxn Us Pens? 23 Reprint 2025-26

[Page 11]
SCIENCE24 7. Which of the following materials fall in the category of a “pure substance”? (a) Ice (b) Milk (c) Iron (d) Hydrochloric acid (e) Calcium oxide (f) Mercury (g) Brick (h) Wood (i) Air 8. Identify the solutions among the following mixtures. (a) Soil (b) Sea water (c) Air (d) Coal (e) Soda water 9. Which of the following will show “Tyndall effect”? (a) Salt solution (b) Milk (c) Copper sulphate solution (d) Starch solution 10. Classify the following into elements, compounds and mixtures. (a) Sodium (b) Soil (c) Sugar solution (d) Silver (e) Calcium carbonate (f) Tin (g) Silicon (h) Coal (i) Air (j) Soap (k) Methane (l) Carbon dioxide (m) Blood 11. Which of the following are chemical changes? (a) Growth of a plant (b) Rusting of iron Reprint 2025-26
7. Which of the following materials fall in the category of a “pure substance’? (a) Ice (b) Milk (ec) Iron (d) Hydrochloric acid (ce) Caleium oxide (t) Mereury (Brick (h) Wood (i) Air 8. Identify the solutions among the following mixtures. (a) Soil (b) Sea water (ce) Air (d) Coal (ec) Soda water 9. Which of the following will show “Tyndall effect"? (a) Salt solution (b) Milk (¢) Copper sulphate solution (d) Starch solution 10. Classify the following into elements, compounds and mixtures. (a) Sodium (b) Soil (ec) Sugar solution (dd) Silver (e) Calcium carbonate (tf) Tin (2) Silicon fh) Coal (i) Air () Soap (k) Methane ()) Carbon dioxide (m) Blood 11. Which of the following are chemical changes? (a) Growth of a plant (b) Rusting of iron 24 Science : Reprint 2025-26

[Page 12]
IS MATTER AROUND US PURE? 25 2525 2525 (c) Mixing of iron filings and sand (d) Cooking of food (e) Digestion of food (f) Freezing of water (g) Burning of a candle Group Activity Take an earthen pot ( matka), some pebbles and sand. Design a small-scale filtration plant that you could use to clean muddy water. Reprint 2025-26
(ec) Mixing of iron filings and sand (d) Cooking of food (ec) Digestion of food () Freezing of water (9) Burning of a candle [Lo Group Activity oat Take an earthen pot (mafka), some pebbles and sand. Design a \ small-scale filtration plant that you could use to clean S 7 Ls y muddy water. \_ S> <> / Is Marien Axouxo Us Pr xe? 25 Reprint 2025-26