[Page 1]
Fig. 2.1: Some consumable items Have you ever noticed the word ‘pure’ written on the packs of these consumables? For a common person pure means having no adulteration. But, for a scientist all these things are actually mixtures of different substances and hence not pure. For example, milk is actually a mixture of water, fat, proteins, etc. When a scientist says that something is pure, it means that all the constituent particles of that substance are the same in their chemical nature. A pure substance consists of a single type of particle. In other words, a substance is a pure single form of matter. As we look around, we can see that most of the matter around us exists as mixtures of two or more pure components, for example, sea water, minerals, soil, etc., are all mixtures. 2.1 What is a Mixture? Mixtures are constituted by more than one kind of pur e for m of matter . We know that dissolved sodium chloride can be separated from water by the physical process of evaporation. However, sodium chloride is itself a pure substance and cannot be separated by physical process into its chemical constituents. Similarly, sugar is a substance which contains only one kind of pure matter and its composition is the same throughout. Soft drink and soil are not single pure substances. Whatever the source of a pure substance may be, it will always have the same characteristic properties. Therefore, we can say that a mixture contains more than one pure substance. 2.1.1 TYPES OF MIXTURES Depending upon the nature of the components that form a mixture, we can have different types of mixtures. Activity ______________ 2.1 • Let us divide the class into groups A, B, C and D. • Group A takes a beaker containing 50 mL of water and one spatula full of copper sulphate powder . Gr oup B takes 50 mL of water and two spatula full of copper sulphate powder in a beaker. • Groups C and D can take different amounts of copper sulphate and potassium permanganate or common salt (sodium chloride) and mix the given components to form a mixture. • Report the observations on the uniformity in colour and texture. • Groups A and B have obtained a mixture which has a uniform composition throughout. Such mixtures are called homogeneous mixtures or solutions. Some other examples of such mixtures are: (i) salt dissolved in water and (ii) sugar dissolved in water . Compar e the How do we judge whether milk, ghee, butter, salt, spices, mineral water or juice that we buy from the market are pure? 2 III IIS SS SS M M M M MATTER ATTERATTER ATTERATTER A A A A AROUND ROUNDROUND ROUNDROUND U U U U US SS SS P P P P PURE UREURE UREURE? ?? ?? C hapter Reprint 2025-26
Or || C ee hapter 2 fa wre 92 Is Matter ArounD Us Pure? How do we judge whether milk, ghee, butter, a pure substance and cannot he separated by salt, spices, mineral water or juice that we buy physical process into its chemical constituents. from the market are pure? Similarly, sugar is a substance which contains only one kind of pure matter and its —— composition is the same throughout. P, oa Mitx DP Soft drink and soil are not single pure pire t, substances. Whatever the source of a SALT Glee Ge pure substance may be, it will always have y : ‘ : an say that a mixture — * contains more than one pure substance. 2.1.1 Types OF MIXTURES Fig. 2.1: Some consumable titers Depending upon the nature of the components Have you ever noticed the word ‘pure’ that form a mixture, we can have different written on the packs of these consumables? types of mixtures. For a common person pure means having no Activity 2.1 adulteration. But, fora scientist all these things re are actually mixtures of different substances © = Let us divide the class into groups A. and hence not pure. For example. milk is B,C and D. actually a mixture of water, fat, proteins, ete. ¢ Group A takes a beaker containing When a scientist says that something is pure. 50 ml. of water and one spatula full it means that all the constituent particles of of copper sulphate powder. Group B takes 50 mL of water and two spatula that substance are the same in their chemical full of copper sulphate powder in a nature. A pure substance consists of a single heaker. type of particle. In other words, a substance is e Groups € and 1D can take different a pure single form of matter. amounts of copper sulphate and As we look around, we can see that most potassium permanganate or common of the matter around us exists as mixtures of salt {sodium chloride] and mix the . given components to form a mixture. two or more pure components, for example. ® Report the observations on the sea water, minerals, soil, etc., are all mixtures. uniformity in colour and texture. : : . Groups A and B have obtained a 2.1 What isa Mixture? mixture which has a uniform Mixtures are constituted by more than one composition throughout, Such kind of pure form of matter. We know that mixtures are called homogencous mixtures or solutions. Some other dissolved sodium chloride can be separated examples of such mixtures are: (i) salt from water by the physical process of dissolved in water and (i) sugar evaporation. However, sodium chloride is itself dissolved in water. Compare the Reprint 2025-26

[Page 2]
More to know colour of the solutions of the two groups. Though both the groups have obtained copper sulphate solution but the intensity of colour of the solutions is different. This shows that a homogeneous mixture can have a variable composition. • Groups C and D have obtained mixtures, which contain physically distinct parts and have non-uniform compositions. Such mixtures are called heterogeneous mixtures. Mixtures of sodium chloride and iron filings, salt and sulphur , and oil and water ar e examples of heterogeneous mixtures. Activity ______________ 2.2 • Let us again divide the class into four groups— A, B, C and D. • Distribute the following samples to each group: − Few crystals of copper sulphate to group A. − One spatula full of copper sulphate to group B. − Chalk powder or wheat flour to group C. − Few drops of milk or ink to group D. • Each group should add the given sample in water and stir properly using a glass rod. Are the particles in the mixture visible? • Direct a beam of light from a torch through the beaker containing the mixture and observe from the front. Was the path of the beam of light visible? • Leave the mixtures undisturbed for a few minutes (and set up the filtration apparatus in the meantime). Is the mixture stable or do the particles begin to settle after some time? • Filter the mixture. Is there any residue on the filter paper? • Discuss the results and form an opinion. Groups A and B have got a solution. Group C has got a suspension. Group D has got a colloidal solution. Now, we shall learn about solutions, suspensions and colloidal solutions in the following sections. uestions 1. What is meant by a substance? 2. List the points of differences between homogeneous and heterogeneous mixtures. 2.2 What is a Solution? A solution is a homogeneous mixture of two or more substances. You come across various types of solutions in your daily life. Lemonade, soda water, etc., are all examples of solutions. Usually we think of a solution as a liquid that contains either a solid, liquid or a gas dissolved in it. But, we can also have solid solutions (alloys) and gaseous solutions (air). In a solution there is homogeneity at the particle level. For example, lemonade tastes the same throughout. This shows that particles of sugar or salt are evenly distributed in the solution. Q Fig. 2.2: Filtration Alloys: Alloys are mixtures of two or more metals or a metal and a non-metal and cannot be separated into their components by physical methods. But still, an alloy is considered as a mixture because it shows the properties of its constituents and can have variable composition. For example, brass is a mixture of approximately 30% zinc and 70% copper. IS MATTER AROUND US PURE? 15 Reprint 2025-26
colour of the solutions of the two Glass rod groups. Though both the groups have ; atnid decantea ‘ath obtained copper sulphate solution but Filler paper a filter paper the intensity of colour of the solutions Funnel is different. This shows that a al homogeneous mixture can have a W variable composition, ity hf ; . Groups C and D have obtained Filter paper Cone ot Test tube mixtures, which contain physically Welded) a filter paper Filtrate distunct parts and have non-uniform compositions. Such mixtures are called heterogeneous mixtures. Mixtures of Fig. 2.2: Filtration sodium chloride and iron filings, salt Now. we shall learn about solutions, and sulphur, and oi and water are suspensions and colloidal solutions in the examples of heterogeneous mixtures. following sections. Activity _________2.2 (1 estions . Let us again divide the class into four | ft. What is micant bya substance? groups— A, B, C and D. 2. List the points of differences . Distribute the following samples to bemvecn homogencous and each group: heterogeneous mixtures. — Few crystals of copper sulphate to group A. - One spatula full of copper sulphate to group B. 2.2 What is a Solution? - Chalk powder or wheat Nour to group C. A solution is a homogeneous mixture of two - Few drops of milk or ink to or more substances. You come across various group 1). types of solutions in your daily life. Lemonade, e Each group should add the given soda water, etc., are all examples of solutions. sample in water and stir properly Usually we think of a solution as a liquid that using a glass rod. Are the particles contains either a solid, liquid ora gas dissolved in the mixture visible? in it. But, we can also have solid solutions ° Ihrect a beam of light from a terch {alloys) and gaseous solutions (air). In a through the beaker containing the solution there is homogeneity at the particle mixture and observe from the front. Was level. For example, lemonade tastes the same the path of the beam of light visible? throughout. This shows that particles of sugar . Leave the mixtures undisturbed for or salt are evenly distributed in a few minutes (and set up the the solution. filtration apparatus in the meantime). Is the mixture stable or do the - particles begin to settle after some Alloys: Alloys are mixtures of two or time? Pag more metals or a metal anda non-metal e Filter the mixture. Is there any 2 and cannot be separated into their residue on the filter paper? gem components by physical methods. But still, an alloy is considered as a mixture e §=$Diseuss the results and form an PM because it shows the properties of its opinion. hag constituents and can have variable Groups A and B have got a solution. SB composition. For example. brass is a Group C has got a suspension. = mixture of approximately 30% zinc and Group 1 has got a colloidal solution. 70% copper. Is Marten Arotan Us Pt xe? 15 Reprint 2025-26 :