[Page 3]
SCIENCE16 A solution has a solvent and a solute as its components. The component of the solution that dissolves the other component in it (usually the component present in larger amount) is called the solvent. The component of the solution that is dissolved in the solvent (usually present in lesser quantity) is called the solute. Examples: (i) A solution of sugar in water is a solid in liquid solution. In this solution, sugar is the solute and water is the solvent. (ii) A solution of iodine in alcohol known as ‘tincture of iodine’, has iodine (solid) as the solute and alcohol (liquid) as the solvent. (iii) Aerated drinks like soda water, etc., are gas in liquid solutions. These contain carbon dioxide (gas) as solute and water (liquid) as solvent. (iv) Air is a mixture of gas in gas. Air is a homogeneous mixture of a number of gases. Its two main constituents are: oxygen (21%) and nitrogen (78%). The other gases are present in very small quantities. Properties of a Solution • A solution is a homogeneous mixture. • The particles of a solution are smaller than 1 nm (10-9 metre) in diameter. So, they cannot be seen by naked eyes. • Because of very small particle size, they do not scatter a beam of light passing through the solution. So, the path of light is not visible in a solution. • The solute particles cannot be separated from the mixture by the process of filtration. The solute particles do not settle down when left undisturbed, that is, a solution is stable. 2.2.1 CONCENTRATION OF A SOLUTION In activity 2.2, we observed that groups A and B obtained different shades of solutions. So, we understand that in a solution the relative proportion of the solute and solvent can be varied. Depending upon the amount of solute present in a solution, it can be called dilute, concentrated or saturated solution. Dilute and concentrated are comparative terms. In activity 2.2, the solution obtained by group A is dilute as compared to that obtained by group B. Activity ______________ 2.3 • Take approximately 50 mL of water each in two separate beakers. • Add salt in one beaker and sugar or barium chloride in the second beaker with continuous stirring. • When no more solute can be dissolved, heat the contents of the beaker to raise the temperature by about 5 oC.° • Start adding the solute again. Is the amount of salt and sugar or barium chloride, that can be dissolved in water at a given temperature, the same? At any particular temperature, a solution that has dissolved as much solute as it is capable of dissolving, is said to be a saturated solution. In other words, when no more solute can be dissolved in a solution at a given temperature, it is called a saturated solution. The amount of the solute present in the saturated solution at this temperature is called its solubility. If the amount of solute contained in a solution is less than the saturation level, it is called an unsaturated solution. What would happen if you were to take a saturated solution at a certain temperature and cool it slowly. We can infer fr om the above activity that different substances in a given solvent have different solubilities at the same temperature. The concentration of a solution is the amount (mass or volume) of solute present in a given amount (mass or volume) of solution. There are various ways of expressing the concentration of a solution, but here we will learn only three methods. (i) Mass by mass percentage of a solution Mass of solute= ×100 Mass of solution Reprint 2025-26
Asolution has a solvent anda solute as its — proportion of the solute and solvent can be components. The component of the solution — varied. Depending upon the amount of solute that dissolves the other component in it present ina solution, it can be called dilute, (usually the component present in larger concentrated or saturated solution, Dilute amount is called the solvent. The component — and concentrated are comparative terms. In of the solution that is dissolved in the solvent — activity 2.2, the solution obtained by group (usually present in lesser quantity) is called — A is dilute as compared to that obtained by the solute. group B. Examples: Activity 23 (i) A solution of sugar in water is a solid ¢ ‘Take approximately 50 ml. of water in liquid solution. In this solution, each in two separate beakers. sugar is the solute and water is . Add salt in one heaker and sugar or the solvent. harium chloride in the second beaker (ii) A solution of iodine in alcohol known with continuous stirring. 7 as ‘tincture of iodine’, has iodine (solid) * When no more solute ean he dissolved, heat the contents of the beaker to raise as the solute and alcoho! (liquid) as the the temperature by about 5°C. solvent. . Start adding the solute again. (iii) Aerated drinks like soda water, etc., are . gas in liquid solutions. These contain Is the amount of salt and sugar or barium carbon dioxide (gas) as solute and water chloride, that can be dissolved in water at a (liquid) as solvent. given temperature, the same? (iv) Air is a mixture of gas in gas. Air is a At any particular temperature, a solution homogeneous mixture ofa number of — that has dissolved as much solute as it is gases. Its two main constituents are: capable of dissolving, is said to be a saturated oxygen (21%) and nitrogen (78%). The solution. In other words, when no more solute other gases are present in very can be dissolved in a solution at a given small quantities. temperature, it is called a saturated solution. The amount of the solute present in the Properties of a Solution saturated solution at this temperature is called its solubility. ¢ Asohution is a homogeneous mixture. If the amount of solute contained in a ¢ The particles of a solution are smaller solution is less than the saturation level. it is than 1 nm (10“ metre) in diameter. So. called an unsaturated solution. they cannot be seen by naked eyes. What would happen if you were to take a ¢ Because of very small particle size, they saturated solution at a certain temperature do not scatter a beam of light passing — and cool it slowly. through the solution. So, the path of We can infer from the above activity that light is not visible in a solution. different substances in a given solvent have ¢ = The solute particles cannot be separated different solubilities at the same temperature. from the mixture by the process of The concentration of'a solution is the amount filtration. The solute particles do not (mass or volume) of solute present in a given settle down when left undisturbed, that amount (mass or volume) of solution. is, a solution is stable. ony . There are various ways of expressing the cence, Cine oe - concentration of a solution, but here we will 2.2.1 CONCENTRATION OF A SOLUTION learn only three methods. In activity 2.2, we observed that groups A and fi) Mass by mass percentage of a solution B obtained different shades of solutions. So, _ Mass of solute x100 we understand that in a solution the relative Mass of solution 16 Science : Reprint 2025-26

[Page 4]
IS MATTER AROUND US PURE? 17 (ii) Mass by volume percentage of a solution Mass of solute= ×100 Volume of solution (iii) Volume by volume per centage of a solution Volume of solute= ×100 Volume of solution Example 2.1 A solution contains 40 g of common salt in 320 g of water. Calculate the concentration in terms of mass by mass percentage of the solution. Solution: Mass of solute (salt) = 40 g Mass of solvent (water) = 320 g We know, Mass of solution = Mass of solute + Mass of solvent = 40 g + 320 g = 360 g Mass percentage of solution Mass of solute= ×100 Massof solution 40= ×100 =11.1% 360 2.2.2 WHAT IS A SUSPENSION? Non-homogeneous systems, like those obtained by group C in activity 2.2, in which solids are dispersed in liquids, are called suspensions. A suspension is a heterogeneous mixture in which the solute particles do not dissolve but remain suspended throughout the bulk of the medium. Particles of a suspension are visible to the naked eye. Properties of a Suspension • Suspension is a heterogeneous mixture. • The particles of a suspension can be seen by the naked eye. • The particles of a suspension scatter a beam of light passing through it and make its path visible. • The solute particles settle down when a suspension is left undisturbed, that is, a suspension is unstable. They can be separated from the mixture by the process of filtration. When the particles settle down, the suspension breaks and it does not scatter light any more. 2.2.3 WHAT IS A COLLOIDAL SOLUTION? The mixture obtained by group D in activity 2.2 is called a colloid or a colloidal solution. The particles of a colloid are uniformly spread throughout the solution. Due to the relatively smaller size of particles, as compared to that of a suspension, the mixture appears to be homogeneous. But actually, a colloidal solution is a heterogeneous mixture, for example, milk. Because of the small size of colloidal particles, we cannot see them with naked eyes. But, these particles can easily scatter a beam of visible light as observed in activity 2.2. This scattering of a beam of light is called the Tyndall effect after the name of the scientist who discovered this effect. Tyndall effect can also be observed when a fine beam of light enters a room through a small hole. This happens due to the scattering of light by the particles of dust and smoke in the air. Fig. 2.3: (a) Solution of copper sulphate does not show Tyndall effect, (b) mixture of water and milk shows Tyndall effect. (a) (b) Reprint 2025-26
(ii) Mass by volume percentage of a solution e =The particles of a suspension scatter a beam of light passing through it and = Mass of solute x100 make its path visible. Volume of solution ¢ = The solute particles settle down when a (iii) Volume by volume percentage of a suspension is left undisturbed, that is, solution a suspension is unstable. They can be Volume of solute separated from the mixture by the = $$$ — _ «100 process of filtration. When the particles Volume of solution settle down, the suspension breaks and ll it does not scatter light any more. Example 2.1 A solution contains 40 g of j . common salt in 320 g of water. Calculate ne tee . . vate the concentration in terms of mass by 2.2.3 WHAT IS A COLLOIDAL SOLUTION? mass percentage of the solution. The mixture obtained by group 1 in activity Solution: 2.2 is called a colloid or a colloidal solution. Mass of solute (salt) = 40g The particles ofa colloid are uniformly spread Mass of solvent (water) = 320 ¢ throughout the solution. Due to the relatively We know, ° smaller size of particles, as compared to that of Massof solution = Mass of solute + a suspension, the mixture appears to be Mass of solvent homogeneous. But actually, a colloidal solution = 40 ¢+ 3208 is a heterogeneous mixture, for example, milk. = 360 g Because of the small size of colloidal Mass percentage of solution particles, we cannot see them with naked eyes. 7 But, these particles can easily scatter a beam __Mass of solute «100 of visible light as observed in activity 2.2. This Massof solution scattering of a beam of light is called the Tyndall effect after the name of the scientist 40 who discovered this effect. = apy * 100 = 11.1% Tyndall effect can also be observed when a 360 TTT .2520T0"”,T’enwmm_ fine beam of light enters a room through a small 2.2.2 WHAT IS A SUSPENSION? hole. This happens due to the scattering of light by the particles of dust and smoke in the air. Non-homogeneous systems, like those obtained by group C in activity 2.2. in which solids are dispersed in liquids, are called suspensions. A suspension is a heterogeneous = mixture in which the solute particles do not | dissolve but remain suspended throughout eat) . han al the bulk of the medium. Particles of a Torch ' becomes suspension are visible to the naked eye. | | visible er Properties of a Suspension (a) (b) ¢ Suspension is a heterogeneous mixture. Fig. 2.3: (a) Sohition of copper sulphate does not ¢ = The particles ofa suspension can be seen show Tyndall effect, (bj mixture of waiter by the naked eye. and milk shows Tyndall effect. Is Marten Arotan Us Pt xe? 17 Reprint 2025-26 :