[Page 5]
MATTER IN O UR S URROUNDING S 5 higher than that of solids. This is due to the fact that in the liquid state, particles move freely and have greater space between each other as compared to particles in the solid state. 1.3.3 THE GASEOUS STATE Have you ever observed a balloon seller filling a large number of balloons fr om a single cylinder of gas? Enquire from him how many balloons is he able to fill fr om one cylinder. Ask him which gas does he have in the cylinder. Activity 1.11 • Take three 100 mL syringes and close their nozzles by rubber corks, as shown in Fig.1.4. • Remove the pistons fr om all the syringes. • Leaving one syringe untouched, fill water in the second and pieces of chalk in the third. • Insert the pistons back into the syringes. You may apply some vaseline on the pistons befor e inserting them into the syringes for their smooth movement. • Now, try to compress the content by pushing the piston in each syringe. We have observed that gases ar e highly compressible as compared to solids and liquids. The liquefied petr oleum gas (LPG) cylinder that we get in our home for cooking or the oxygen supplied to hospitals in cylinders is compr essed gas. Compr essed natural gas (CNG) is used as fuel these days in vehicles. Due to its high compressibility, large volumes of a gas can be compr essed into a small cylinder and transported easily. We come to know of what is being cooked in the kitchen without even entering ther e, by the smell that reaches our nostrils. How does this smell reach us? The particles of the aroma of food mix with the particles of air spread from the kitchen, reach us and even farther away. The smell of hot cooked food reaches us in seconds; compare this with the rate of diffusion of solids and liquids. Due to high speed of particles and large space between them, gases show the pr operty of diffusing very fast into other gases. In the gaseous state, the particles move about randomly at high speed. Due to this random movement, the particles hit each other and also the walls of the container. The pressure exerted by the gas is because of this force exerted by gas particles per unit ar ea on the walls of the container. Fig. 1.4 • What do you observe? In which case was the piston easily pushed in? • What do you infer fr om your observations? Fig.1.5: a, b and c show the magnified schematic pictures of the three states of matter . The motion of the particles can be seen and compared in the three states of matter.

[Page 6]
SCIENCE6 1.4.1 EFFECT OF CHANGE OF TEMPERATURE Activity 1.12 • Take about 150 g of ice in a beaker and suspend a laboratory thermometer so that its bulb is in contact with the ice, as in Fig. 1.6. uestions 1. The mass per unit volume of a substance is called density. (density = mass/volume). Arrange the following in order of increasing density – air, exhaust from chimneys, honey, water , chalk, cotton and iron. 2. (a) Tabulate the dif ferences in the characterisitcs of states of matter. (b) Comment upon the following: rigidity, compressibility, fluidity, filling a gas container , shape, kinetic energy and density. 3. Give reasons (a) A gas fills completely the vessel in which it is kept. (b) A gas exerts pressure on the walls of the container. (c) A wooden table should be called a solid. (d) We can easily move our hand in air but to do the same through a solid block of wood we need a karate expert. 4. Liquids generally have lower density as compar ed to solids. But you must have observed that ice floats on water. Find out why. 1.4 Can Matter Change its State? We all know from our observation that water can exist in three states of matter– • solid, as ice, • liquid, as the familiar water, and • gas, as water vapour. What happens inside the matter during this change of state? What happens to the particles of matter during the change of states? How does this change of state take place? We need answers to these questions, isn’t it? Q (a) (b) Fig. 1.6: (a) Conversion of ice to water, (b) conversion of water to water vapour

[Page 7]
MATTER IN O UR S URROUNDING S 7 • Start heating the beaker on a low flame. • Note the temperature when the ice starts melting. • Note the temperature when all the ice has converted into water. • Recor d your observations for this conversion of solid to liquid state. • Now, put a glass rod in the beaker and heat while stirring till the water starts boiling. • Keep a careful eye on the thermometer reading till most of the water has vaporised. • Recor d your observations for the conversion of water in the liquid state to the gaseous state. On increasing the temperature of solids, the kinetic energy of the particles increases. Due to the incr ease in kinetic energy, the particles start vibrating with greater speed. The energy supplied by heat overcomes the forces of attraction between the particles. The particles leave their fixed positions and start moving more freely. A stage is reached when the solid melts and is converted to a liquid. The minimum temperature at which a solid melts to become a liquid at the atmospheric pressure is called its melting point. The melting point of a solid is an indication of the strength of the force of attraction between its particles. The melting point of ice is 273.15 K*. The process of melting, that is, change of solid state into liquid state is also known as fusion. When a solid melts, its temperature remains the same, so where does the heat energy go? You must have observed, during the experiment of melting, that the temperature of the system does not change after the melting point is reached, till all the ice melts. This happens even though we continue to heat the beaker, that is, we continue to supply heat. This heat gets used up in changing the state by overcoming the forces of attraction between the particles. As this heat energy is absorbed by ice without showing any rise in temperature, it is consider ed that it gets hidden into the contents of the beaker and is known as the latent heat. The wor d latent means hidden. The amount of heat energy that is required to change 1 kg of a solid into liquid at atmospheric pressure at its melting point is known as the latent heat of fusion. So, particles in water at 0oC (273 K) have more energy as compared to particles in ice at the same temperature. When we supply heat energy to water , particles start moving even faster. At a certain temperature, a point is reached when the particles have enough energy to break fr ee from the forces of attraction of each other. At this temperature the liquid starts changing into gas. The temperature at which a liquid starts boiling at the atmospheric pressure is known as its boiling point. Boiling is a bulk phenomenon. Particles from the bulk of the liquid gain enough energy to change into the vapour state. For water this temperature is 373 K (100oC = 273 + 100 = 373 K). Can you define the latent heat of vaporisation? Do it in the same way as we have defined the latent heat of fusion. Particles in steam, that is, water vapour at 373 K (1000 C) have more energy than water at the same temperature. This is because particles in steam have absorbed extra energy in the form of latent heat of vaporisation. *Note: Kelvin is the SI unit of temperature, 0o C =273.15 K. For convenience, we take 0o C = 273 K after rounding off the decimal. To change a temperature on the Kelvin scale to the Celsius scale you have to subtract 273 from the given temperature, and to convert a temperature on the Celsius scale to the Kelvin scale you have to add 273 to the given temperature. So, we infer that the state of matter can be changed into another state by changing the temperature. We have learnt that substances around us change state from solid to liquid and from liquid to gas on application of heat. But there

[Page 8]
SCIENCE8 enclosed in a cylinder? Will the particles come closer? Do you think that increasing or decreasing the pressure can change the state of matter? are some that change directly from solid state to gaseous state and vice versa without changing into the liquid state. Activity 1.13 • Take some camphor. Crush it and put it in a china dish. • Put an inverted funnel over the china dish. • Put a cotton plug on the stem of the funnel, as shown in Fig. 1.7. * atmosphere (atm) is a unit of measuring pressure exerted by a gas. The unit of pressure is Pascal (Pa): 1 atmosphere = 1.01 × 105 Pa. The pressure of air in atmosphere is called atmospheric pressure. The atmospheric pressure at sea level is 1 atmosphere, and is taken as the normal atmospheric pressure. Fig. 1.7: Sublimation of camphor Fig. 1.8: By applying pressure, particles of matter can be brought close together Applying pressure and reducing temperature can liquefy gases. Have you hear d of solid carbon dioxide (CO2)? It is stored under high pressure. Solid CO2 gets converted directly into gaseous state on decr ease of pr essure to 1 atmosphere* without coming into liquid state. This is the reason that solid carbon dioxide is also known as dry ice. Thus, we can say that pr essur e and temperature deter mine the state of a substance, whether it will be solid, liquid or gas. • Now, heat slowly and observe. • What do you infer from the above activity? A change of state directly from solid to gas without changing into liquid state is called sublimation and the direct change of gas to solid without changing into liquid is called deposition. 1.4.2 EFFECT OF CHANGE OF PRESSURE We have already learnt that the difference in various states of matter is due to the dif ference in the distances between the constituent particles. What will happen when we start putting pressure and compress a gas Fig. 1.9: Interconversion of the three states of matter Deposition