[Page 9]
MATTE R IN O UR S URRO UN DING S 9 99 99 • Record the room temperature. • Record the time or days taken for the evaporation process in the above cases. • Repeat the above three steps of activity on a rainy day and record your observations. • What do you infer about the ef fect of temperature, surface area and wind velocity (speed) on evaporation? You must have observed that the rate of evaporation increases with– • an increase of surface area: We know that evaporation is a surface phenomenon. If the surface area is increased, the rate of evaporation increases. For example, while putting clothes for drying up we spread them out. • an increase of temperature: With the increase of temperature, more number of particles get enough kinetic energy to go into the vapour state. • a decrease in humidity: Humidity is the amount of water vapour present in air. The air around us cannot hold more than a definite amount of water vapour at a given temperature. If the amount of water in air is already high, the rate of evaporation decreases. • an increase in wind speed: It is a common observation that clothes dry faster on a windy day . With the increase in wind speed, the particles of water vapour move away with the wind, decreasing the amount of water vapour in the surrounding. 1.5.2 HOW DOES EVAPORATION CAUSE COOLING? In an open vessel, the liquid keeps on evaporating. The particles of liquid absorb energy from the surrounding to regain the energy lost during evaporation. This absorption of energy from the surroundings make the surroundings cold. uestions 1. Convert the following temperature to celsius scale: a. 300 K b. 573 K 2. What is the physical state of water at: a. 250oC b. 100oC ? 3. For any substance, why does the temperature remain constant during the change of state? 4. Suggest a method to liquefy atmospheric gases. 1.5 Evaporation Do we always need to heat or change pressure for changing the state of matter? Can you quote some examples from everyday life where change of state from liquid to vapour takes place without the liquid reaching the boiling point? Water, when left uncovered, slowly changes into vapour. Wet clothes dry up. What happens to water in the above two examples? We know that particles of matter are always moving and are never at rest. At a given temperature in any gas, liquid or solid, there are particles with different amounts of kinetic energy. In the case of liquids, a small fraction of particles at the surface, having higher kinetic energy, is able to break away from the forces of attraction of other particles and gets converted into vapour. This phenomenon of change of liquid into vapours at any temperature below its boiling point is called evaporation. 1.5.1 FACTORS AFFECTING EVAPORATION Let us understand this with an activity. Activity 1.14 • Take 5 mL of water in a test tube and keep it near a window or under a fan. • Take 5 mL of water in an open china dish and keep it near a window or under a fan. • Take 5 mL of water in an open china dish and keep it inside a cupboard or on a shelf in your class. Q

[Page 10]
SCIENCE10 What you have learnt • Matter is made up of small particles. • The matter around us exists in three states—solid, liquid and gas. • The forces of attraction between the particles are maximum in solids, intermediate in liquids and minimum in gases. • The spaces in between the constituent particles and kinetic energy of the particles ar e minimum in the case of solids, intermediate in liquids and maximum in gases. What happens when you pour some acetone (nail polish remover) on your palm? The particles gain energy from your palm or surroundings and evaporate causing the palm to feel cool. After a hot sunny day, people sprinkle water on the r oof or open gr ound because the large latent heat of vaporisation of water helps to cool the hot surface. Can you cite some mor e examples fr om daily life where we can feel the effect of cooling due to evaporation? Why should we wear cotton clothes in summer? During summer , we perspir e mor e because of the mechanism of our body which keeps us cool. W e know that during evaporation, the particles at the surface of the liquid gain energy from the surroundings or body surface and change into vapour. The heat energy equal to the latent heat of vaporisation is absorbed fr om the body leaving the body cool. Cotton, being a good absorber of water helps in absorbing the sweat and exposing it to the atmosphere for easy evaporation. Why do we see water droplets on the outer surface of a glass containing ice-cold water? Let us take some ice-cold water in a tumbler. Soon we will see water droplets on the outer surface of the tumbler. The water vapour present in air, on coming in contact with the cold glass of water, loses energy and gets converted to liquid state, which we see as water droplets. uestions 1. Why does a desert cooler cool better on a hot dry day? 2. How does the water kept in an earthen pot (matka) become cool during summer? 3. Why does our palm feel cold when we put some acetone or petrol or perfume on it? 4. Why are we able to sip hot tea or milk faster from a saucer rather than a cup? 5. What type of clothes should we wear in summer? Q

[Page 11]
MATTER IN O UR S URROUNDING S 11 • The arrangement of particles is most ordered in the case of solids, in the case of liquids layers of particles can slip and slide over each other while for gases, ther e is no order, particles just move about randomly. • The states of matter are inter-convertible. The state of matter can be changed by changing temperature or pressure. • Sublimation is the change of solid state directly to gaseous state without going through liquid state. • Deposition is the change of gaseous state directly to solid state without going through liquid state. • Boiling is a bulk phenomenon. Particles from the bulk (whole) of the liquid change into vapour state. • Evaporation is a surface phenomenon. Particles from the surface gain enough energy to overcome the forces of attraction present in the liquid and change into the vapour state. • The rate of evaporation depends upon the surface area exposed to the atmosphere, the temperature, the humidity and the wind speed. • Evaporation causes cooling. • Latent heat of vaporisation is the heat energy required to change 1 kg of a liquid to gas at atmospheric pressure at its boiling point. • Latent heat of fusion is the amount of heat energy required to change 1 kg of solid into liquid at its melting point. • Some measurable quantities and their units to remember: Quantity Unit Symbol Temperature kelvin K Length metre m Mass kilogram kg Weight newton N Volume cubic metre m3 Density kilogram per cubic metre kg m–3 Pressure pascal Pa

[Page 12]
SCIENCE12 1. Convert the following temperatures to the celsius scale. (a) 293 K (b) 470 K 2. Convert the following temperatures to the kelvin scale. (a) 25o°C (b) 373o°C 3. Give reason for the following observations. (a) Naphthalene balls disappear with time without leaving any solid. (b) We can get the smell of perfume sitting several metres away. 4. Arrange the following substances in increasing order of forces of attraction between the particles— water, sugar, oxygen. 5. What is the physical state of water at— (a) 25o°C (b) 0o°C (c) 100o°C ? 6. Give two reasons to justify— (a) water at room temperature is a liquid. (b) an iron almirah is a solid at room temperature. 7. Why is ice at 273 K more effective in cooling than water at the same temperature? 8. What produces more severe burns, boiling water or steam? 9. Name A,B,C,D,E and F in the following diagram showing change in its state Exercises

[Page 13]
MATTER IN O UR S URROUNDING S 13 Group Activity Prepare a model to demonstrate movement of particles in solids, liquids and gases. For making this model you will need • A transparent jar • A big rubber balloon or piece of stretchable rubber sheet • A string • Few chickpeas or black gram or dry green peas. How to make? • Put the seeds in the jar. • Sew the string to the centre of the rubber sheet and put some tape to keep it tied securely. • Stretch and tie the rubber sheet on the mouth of the jar . • Your model is ready. Now run your fingers up and d own the string by first tugging at it slowly and then rapidly. Fig. 1.10: A model for converting of solid to liquid and liquid to gas.