[Page 1]
As we look at our surroundings, we see a large variety of things with different shapes, sizes and textures. Everything in this universe is made up of material which scientists have named “matter”. The air we br eathe, the food we eat, stones, clouds, stars, plants and animals, even a small dr op of water or a particle of sand — every thing is matter. We can also see as we look around that all the things mentioned above occupy space and have mass. In other words, they have both mass* and volume**. Since early times, human beings have been trying to understand their surroundings. Early Indian philosophers classified matter in the form of five basic elements — the “Panch Tatva” — air , earth, fir e, sky and water . According to them everything, living or non- living, was made up of these five basic elements. Ancient Gr eek philosophers had arrived at a similar classification of matter. Modern day scientists have evolved two types of classification of matter based on their physical properties and chemical nature. In this chapter we shall lear n about matter based on its physical pr operties. Chemical aspects of matter will be taken up in subsequent chapters. 1.1 Physical Nature of Matter 1.1.1 MATTER IS MADE UP OF PARTICLES For a long time, two schools of thought prevailed regarding the natur e of matter . One school believed matter to be continuous like a block of wood, whereas, the other thought that matter was made up of particles like sand. Let us perform an activity to decide about the nature of matter — is it continuous or particulate? Activity ______________ 1.1 • Take a 100 mL beaker . • Fill half the beaker with water and mark the level of water. • Dissolve some salt/ sugar with the help of a glass rod. • Observe any change in water level. • What do you think has happened to the salt? • Where does it disappear? • Does the level of water change? In or der to answer these questions we need to use the idea that matter is made up of particles. What was there in the spoon, salt or sugar, has now spread throughout water. This is illustrated in Fig. 1.1. 1.1.2 HOW SMALL ARE THESE PARTICLES OF MATTER? Activity ______________ 1.2 • Take 2–3 crystals of potassium permanganate and dissolve them in 100 mL of water. Fig. 1.1: When we dissolve salt in water, the particles of salt get into the spaces between particles of water. * The SI unit of mass is kilogram (kg). ** The SI unit of volume is cubic metr e (m3). The common unit of measuring volume is litre (L) such that 1L = 1 dm 3, 1L = 1000 mL, 1 mL = 1 cm 3. 1 M MMMMATTER ATTERATTER ATTERATTER IN ININ ININ O O O O OUR URUR URUR S S S S SURROUNDINGSURROUNDINGSURROUNDINGSURROUNDINGSURROUNDINGS C hapter Reprint 2025-26
ie: hapter oats tn MATTER IN OuR SURROUNDINGS As we look at our surroundings, we see a large Activity 1.1 variety of things with different shapes, sizes . and textures. Everything in this universe is ¢ Take a 100 ml. beaker. made up of material which scientists have * Fill half the heaker with water and named “matter”. The air we breathe, the food mark the level ot water. . . Iissolve some salt/ sugar with the help we eat. stones, clouds, stars, plants and of a plass rod. animals, even a small drop of water or a * Observe any change in water level. particle of sand — every thing is matter. We * What do you think has happened to can also see as we look around that all the the salt? — things mentioned above occupy space and ¢ — Where does it disappear? have mass. In other words, they have both ¢ Does the level of water change? mass* and volume**. In order to answer these questions we Since early times, human beings have peed to use the idea that matter is made up been trying to understand their surroundings. or particles. What was there in the spoon, salt Early Indian philosophers classified matter in orst igar, has now spread throughout water. the form of five basic elements — the “Panch This is illustrated in Fis. 1.1 Tatva” — air, earth, fire. sky and water. . According to them everything, living or non- living. was made up of these five basic N elements. Ancient Greek philosophers had got “= Q..., Sx rey arrived at a similar classification of matter. ) | i ~ \ ~ Modern day scientists have evolved two Water —— Water \ a Water types of classification of matter based on their a, Adasale | 2 su” Sw Sal physical properties and chemical nature. Particles ofwater Salt ~~ In this chapter we shall learn about magnified millions matter based on its physical properties. ; Chemical aspects of matter will be taken up in subsequent chapters. Fig. 1.1: When we dissolve salt in water, the particles . of salt get into the spaces between particles 1.1 Physical Nature of Matter of water ’ ’ 1.1.1 MATTER IS MADE UP OF PARTICLES 1.1.2 How SMALL ARE THESE PARTICLES For a long time. two schools of thought prevailed . aereR D> regarding the nature of matter. One school OF MATTER? believed matter to be continuous like a block Activity 1.2 of wood, whereas, the other thought that matter ctivity ° was made up of particles like sand. Let us ¢ ‘Take 2-3 crystals of potassium perform an activity to decide about the nature permanganate and dissolve them in of matter — is it continuous or particulate? 100 ml. of water. ** The SI unit of volume is cubie metre (mm). The common unit of measuring volume is litre (L) such that IL - dm’, 1b - 1000 mL. 1 mL. = 1 erm?*. Reprint 2025 26

[Page 2]
SCIENCE2 • Take out approximately 10 mL of this solution and put it into 90 mL of clear water. • Take out 10 mL of this solution and put it into another 90 mL of clear water. • Keep diluting the solution like this 5 to 8 times. • Is the water still coloured ? 1.2.2 PARTICLES OF MATTER ARE CONTINUOUSLY MOVING Activity Activity Activity Activity Activity 1.3 1.31.3 1.31.3 • Put an unlit incense stick in a corner of your class. How close do you have to go near it so as to get its smell? • Now light the incense stick. What happens? Do you get the smell sitting at a distance? • Record your observations. Activity Activity Activity Activity Activity 1.4 1.41.4 1.41.4 • Take two glasses/beakers filled with water. • Put a dr op of blue or r ed ink slowly and carefully along the sides of the first beaker and honey in the same way in the second beaker. • Leave them undisturbed in your house or in a corner of the class. • Record your observations. • What do you observe immediately after adding the ink drop? • What do you observe immediately after adding a drop of honey? • How many hours or days does it take for the colour of ink to spr ead evenly throughout the water? Activity Activity Activity Activity Activity 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 • Drop a crystal of copper sulphate or potassium permanganate into a glass of hot water and another containing cold water. Do not stir the solution. Allow the crystals to settle at the bottom. • What do you observe just above the solid crystal in the glass? • What happens as time passes? • What does this suggest about the particles of solid and liquid? • Does the rate of mixing change with temperature? Why and how? From the above three activities (1.3, 1.4 and 1.5), we can conclude the following: Fig. 1.2: Estimating how small ar e the particles of matter. With every dilution, though the colour becomes light, it is still visible. This experiment shows that just a few crystals of potassium per manganate can colour a lar ge volume of water (about 1000 L). So we conclude that there must be millions of tiny particles in just one crystal of potassium permanganate, which keep on dividing themselves into smaller and smaller particles. The same activity can be done using 2 mL of Dettol instead of potassium permanganate. The smell can be detected even on repeated dilution. The particles of matter are very small – they are small beyond our imagination!!!! 1.2 Characteristics of Particles of Matter 1.2.1 PARTICLES OF MATTER HAVE SPACE BETWEEN THEM In activities 1.1 and 1.2 we saw that particles of sugar , salt, Dettol, or potassium permanganate got evenly distributed in water. Similarly, when we make tea, cof fee or lemonade (nimbu paani ), particles of one type of matter get into the spaces between particles of the other. This shows that ther e is enough space between particles of matter. Reprint 2025-26
¢ Take out approximately 10 mL of this 1.2.2 PARTICLES OF MATTER ARE solution and put it into 90 m1. of clear water, CONTINLOUSLY MOVING ° Take out 10 mL. of this solution and ut it into another 90 mL of clear water. oe ° Keep diluting the solution like this 5 to Activity TT 4.3 8 times, ° Is the water still coloured ? ° Put an unlit incense stick in a corner of your class. How close do you have to go near it so as to pet its smell’? Fpomt — Fpomb — 10 ml. ° Now light the incense stick. What i ~ happens? Do you get the smell sitting —<f | [ | [" Pr] at a distance? <Q LIP Chie Lie <n ie ey ¢ ~~ Record your observations. vom) fowas, lnm, son) wal Aletivity tg . Take two plasses/beakers filled with Fig. 1.2: Estimating how small are the particles of water, Malte. With every dilution though the colour e Put a drop of blue or red ink slowly becomes light, it is sdll visible. . ye . and carefully along the sides of the first heaker and honey in the same way in This experiment shows that just a few the second beaker. crystals of potassium permanganate can . Leave them undisturbed in your house colour a large volume of water (about or in a corner of the class. 1000 L}. So we conclude that there must be . Record your observations. millions of tiny particles in just one crystal ¢ = What do you observe immediately after of potassium permanganate, which keep adding the ink drop? on dividing themselves into smaller and ¢ What do you observe immediately after smaller particles. adding a drop of honey? The same activity can be done using 2 mL. ¢ How many hours or days does it take of Dettol instead of potassium permanganate. for the colour of ink to spread evenly The smell can be detected even on throughout the water? repeated dilution. they are small beyond our imagination!!! ° Drop a crystal of copper sulphate or 12 Characteristics of Particles of potassium permanganate into a glass of hot water and another containing Matter cold water. Do not stir the solution. Allow the erystals to settle at the 1.2.1 PARTICLES OF MATTER HAVE SPACE bottom. . BETWEEN THEM e What do you observe just above the solid crystal in the glass? In activities 1.1 and 1.2 we saw that particles * What happens as time passes? of sugar, salt, Dettol, or potassium . What does this suggest about the permanganate got evenly distributed in water. particles of solid and. liquid? Similarly, when we make tea. coffee or * Does the rate of mixing change with lemonade (nimbu paani), particles of one type temperature? Why and how? of matter get into the spaces between particles . So . of the other. This shows that there is enough From the above three activities (1.3, 1.4 and space between particles of matter. 1.5), we can conclude the following: 2 Scieack : Reprint 2025 26