[Page 1]
As we look at our surroundings, we see a large variety of things with different shapes, sizes and textures. Everything in this universe is made up of material which scientists have named “matter”. The air we breathe, the food we eat, stones, clouds, stars, plants and animals, even a small drop of water or a particle of sand — every thing is matter. We can also see as we look around that all the things mentioned above occupy space and have mass. In other words, they have both mass* and volume**. Since early times, human beings have been trying to understand their surroundings. Early Indian philosophers classified matter in the form of five basic elements — the “Panch Tatva” — air , earth, fire, sky and water . According to them everything, living or non- living, was made up of these five basic elements. Ancient Greek philosophers had arrived at a similar classification of matter. Modern day scientists have evolved two types of classification of matter based on their physical properties and chemical nature. In this chapter we shall learn about matter based on its physical properties. Chemical aspects of matter will be taken up in subsequent chapters. 1.1 Physical Nature of Matter 1.1.1 MATTER IS MADE UP OF PARTICLES For a long time, two schools of thought prevailed regarding the nature of matter . One school believed matter to be continuous like a block of wood, whereas, the other thought that matter was made up of particles like sand. Let us perform an activity to decide about the nature of matter — is it continuous or particulate? Activity 1.1 • Take a 100 mL beaker . • Fill half the beaker with water and mark the level of water. • Dissolve some salt/ sugar with the help of a glass rod. • Observe any change in water level. • What do you think has happened to the salt? • Where does it disappear? • Does the level of water change? In order to answer these questions we need to use the idea that matter is made up of particles. What was there in the spoon, salt or sugar, has now spread throughout water. This is illustrated in Fig. 1.1. 1.1.2 HOW SMALL ARE THESE PARTICLES OF MATTER? Activity 1.2 • Take 2–3 crystals of potassium permanganate and dissolve them in 100 mL of water. Fig. 1.1: When we dissolve salt in water, the particles of salt get into the spaces between particles of water. * The SI unit of mass is kilogram (kg). ** The SI unit of volume is cubic metre (m3). The common unit of measuring volume is litre (L) such that 1L = 1 dm 3, 1L = 1000 mL, 1 mL = 1 cm 3. 1 M MMMMATTER ATTERATTER ATTERATTER IN ININ ININ O O O O OUR URUR URUR S S S S SURROUNDINGSURROUNDINGSURROUNDINGSURROUNDINGSURROUNDINGS C hapter

[Page 2]
SCIENCE2 • Take out approximately 10 mL of this solution and put it into 90 mL of clear water. • Take out 10 mL of this solution and put it into another 90 mL of clear water. • Keep diluting the solution like this 5 to 8 times. • Is the water still coloured ? 1.2.2 PARTICLES OF MATTER ARE CONTINUOUSLY MOVING Activity Activity Activity Activity Activity 1.3 1.31.3 1.31.3 • Put an unlit incense stick in a corner of your class. How close do you have to go near it so as to get its smell? • Now light the incense stick. What happens? Do you get the smell sitting at a distance? • Record your observations. Activity Activity Activity Activity Activity 1.4 1.41.4 1.41.4 • Take two glasses/beakers filled with water. • Put a drop of blue or r ed ink slowly and carefully along the sides of the first beaker and honey in the same way in the second beaker. • Leave them undisturbed in your house or in a corner of the class. • Record your observations. • What do you observe immediately after adding the ink drop? • What do you observe immediately after adding a drop of honey? • How many hours or days does it take for the colour of ink to spr ead evenly throughout the water? Activity Activity Activity Activity Activity 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 • Drop a crystal of copper sulphate or potassium permanganate into a glass of hot water and another containing cold water. Do not stir the solution. Allow the crystals to settle at the bottom. • What do you observe just above the solid crystal in the glass? • What happens as time passes? • What does this suggest about the particles of solid and liquid? • Does the rate of mixing change with temperature? Why and how? From the above three activities (1.3, 1.4 and 1.5), we can conclude the following: Fig. 1.2: Estimating how small ar e the particles of matter. With every dilution, though the colour becomes light, it is still visible. This experiment shows that just a few crystals of potassium permanganate can colour a large volume of water (about 1000 L). So we conclude that there must be millions of tiny particles in just one crystal of potassium permanganate, which keep on dividing themselves into smaller and smaller particles. The same activity can be done using 2 mL of Dettol instead of potassium permanganate. The smell can be detected even on repeated dilution. The particles of matter are very small – they are small beyond our imagination!!!! 1.2 Characteristics of Particles of Matter 1.2.1 PARTICLES OF MATTER HAVE SPACE BETWEEN THEM In activities 1.1 and 1.2 we saw that particles of sugar , salt, Dettol, or potassium permanganate got evenly distributed in water. Similarly, when we make tea, coffee or lemonade (nimbu paani ), particles of one type of matter get into the spaces between particles of the other. This shows that ther e is enough space between particles of matter.

[Page 3]
MATTER IN O UR S URROUNDING S 3 • If we consider each student as a particle of matter, then in which group the particles held each other with the maximum force? Activity 1.7 • Take an iron nail, a piece of chalk and a rubber band. • Try breaking them by hammering, cutting or stretching. • In which of the above three substances do you think the particles are held together with greater force? Activity 1.8 • Take some water in a container , try cutting the surface of water with your fingers. • Were you able to cut the surface of water? • What could be the reason behind the surface of water remaining together? The above three activities (1.6, 1.7 and 1.8) suggest that particles of matter have force acting between them. This force keeps the particles together. The strength of this force of attraction varies from one kind of matter to another. uestions 1. Which of the following are matter? Chair , air , love, smell, hate, almonds, thought, cold, lemon water, smell of perfume. 2. Give reasons for the following observation: The smell of hot sizzling food reaches you several metres away, but to get the smell from cold food you have to go close. 3. A diver is able to cut through water in a swimming pool. Which property of matter does this observation show? 4. What are the characteristics of the particles of matter? Particles of matter are continuously moving, that is, they possess what we call the kinetic energy. As the temperature rises, particles move faster. So, we can say that with increase in temperature the kinetic energy of the particles also increases. In the above three activities we observe that particles of matter intermix on their own with each other. They do so by getting into the spaces between the particles. This intermixing of particles of two different types of matter on their own is called diffusion. We also observe that on heating, dif fusion becomes faster. Why does this happen? 1.2.3 PARTICLES OF MATTER ATTRACT EACH OTHER Activity 1.6 • Play this game in the field— make four groups and form human chains as suggested: • The first group should hold each other from the back and lock arms like Idu-Mishmi dancers (Fig. 1.3). Fig. 1.3 • The second group should hold hands to form a human chain. • The third gr oup should form a chain by touching each other with only their finger tips. • Now, the fourth gr oup of students should run around and try to break the three human chains one by one into as many small groups as possible. • Which group was the easiest to break? Why? Q

[Page 4]
SCIENCE4 1.3 States of Matter Observe different types of matter around you. What are its different states? We can see that matter around us exists in three different states– solid, liquid and gas. These states of matter arise due to the variation in the characteristics of the particles of matter. Now, let us study about the properties of these three states of matter in detail. 1.3.1 THE SOLID STATE Activity 1.9 • Collect the following articles — a pen, a book, a needle and a piece of wooden stick. • Sketch the shape of the above articles in your notebook by moving a pencil around them. • Do all these have a definite shape, distinct boundaries and a fixed volume? • What happens if they are hammered, pulled or dropped? • Are these capable of diffusing into each other? • Try compr essing them by applying force. Are you able to compress them? All the above ar e examples of solids. W e can observe that all these have a definite shape, distinct boundaries and fixed volumes, that is, have negligible compressibility. Solids have a tendency to maintain their shape when subjected to outside force. Solids may break under force but it is difficult to change their shape, so they are rigid. Consider the following: (a) What about a rubber band, can it change its shape on stretching? Is it a solid? (b) What about sugar and salt? When kept in different jars these take the shape of the jar. Are they solid? (c) What about a sponge? It is a solid yet we are able to compress it. Why? All the above are solids as: • A rubber band changes shape under force and regains the same shape when the force is removed. If excessive force is applied, it breaks. • The shape of each individual sugar or salt crystal r emains fixed, whether we take it in our hand, put it in a plate or in a jar. • A sponge has minute holes, in which air is trapped, when we press it, the air is expelled out and we ar e able to compress it. 1.3.2 THE LIQUID STATE Activity 1.10 • Collect the following: (a) water, cooking oil, milk, juice, a cold drink. (b) containers of different shapes. Put a 50 mL mark on these containers using a measuring cylinder fr om the laboratory. • What will happen if these liquids ar e spilt on the floor? • Measure 50 mL of any one liquid and transfer it into different containers one by one. Does the volume r emain the same? • Does the shape of the liquid remain the same ? • When you pour the liquid fr om one container into another , does it flow easily? We observe that liquids have no fixed shape but have a fixed volume. They take up the shape of the container in which they are kept. Liquids flow and change shape, so they are not rigid but can be called fluid. Refer to activities 1.4 and 1.5 wher e we saw that solids and liquids can diffuse into liquids. The gases fr om the atmosphere diffuse and dissolve in water . These gases, especially oxygen and carbon dioxide, ar e essential for the survival of aquatic animals and plants. All living cr eatures need to breathe for survival. The aquatic animals can breathe under water due to the presence of dissolved oxygen in water. Thus, we may conclude that solids, liquids and gases can diffuse into liquids. The rate of diffusion of liquids is