[Page 5]
MATTER IN O UR S URROUNDING S 5 higher than that of solids. This is due to the fact that in the liquid state, particles move freely and have greater space between each other as compared to particles in the solid state. 1.3.3 THE GASEOUS STATE Have you ever observed a balloon seller filling a lar ge number of balloons fr om a single cylinder of gas? Enquire from him how many balloons is he able to fill fr om one cylinder. Ask him which gas does he have in the cylinder. Activity _____________1.11 • Take three 100 mL syringes and close their nozzles by rubber corks, as shown in Fig.1.4. • Remove the pistons fr om all the syringes. • Leaving one syringe untouched, fill water in the second and pieces of chalk in the third. • Insert the pistons back into the syringes. You may apply some vaseline on the pistons befor e inserting them into the syringes for their smooth movement. • Now, try to compr ess the content by pushing the piston in each syringe. We have observed that gases ar e highly compr essible as compared to solids and liquids. The liquefied petr oleum gas (LPG) cylinder that we get in our home for cooking or the oxygen supplied to hospitals in cylinders is compr essed gas. Compr essed natural gas (CNG) is used as fuel these days in vehicles. Due to its high compr essibility, large volumes of a gas can be compr essed into a small cylinder and transported easily. We come to know of what is being cooked in the kitchen without even entering ther e, by the smell that r eaches our nostrils. How does this smell reach us? The particles of the aroma of food mix with the particles of air spread from the kitchen, reach us and even farther away. The smell of hot cooked food reaches us in seconds; compare this with the rate of diffusion of solids and liquids. Due to high speed of particles and lar ge space between them, gases show the pr operty of diffusing very fast into other gases. In the gaseous state, the particles move about randomly at high speed. Due to this random movement, the particles hit each other and also the walls of the container. The pressure exerted by the gas is because of this force exerted by gas particles per unit ar ea on the walls of the container. Fig. 1.4 • What do you observe? In which case was the piston easily pushed in? • What do you infer fr om your observations? Fig.1.5: a, b and c show the magnified schematic pictures of the thr ee states of matter . The motion of the particles can be seen and compared in the three states of matter. Reprint 2025-26
higher than that of solids. This is due to the We have observed that gases are highly fact that in the liquid state. particles move compressible as compared to solids and freely and have greater space between each — liquids. The liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) other as compared to particles in the solid cylinder that we get in our home for cooking state. or the oxygen supplied to hospitals in cylinders is compressed gas. Compressed 1.3.3 THE GASEOUS STATE natural gas (CNG) is used as fuel these days in vehicles. Due to its high compressibility, Have you ever observed a balloon seller filling — large volumes of a gas can be compressed a large number of balloons from a single — into a small cylinder and transported easily. cylinder of gas? Enquire from him how many We come to know of what is being cooked balloons is he able to fill from one cylinder. — in the kitchen without even entering there, Ask him which gas does he have in the cylinder. by the smell that reaches our nostrils. How . does this smell reach us? The particles of the Activity 1.11 aroma of food mix with the particles of air Take tt 100 mi | hel spread from the kitchen, reach us and even ake three mie syringes and close farther away. The smell of hot cooked food their nozzles by rubber corks, as . to ger a reaches us in seconds; compare this with the shown in Fig. 1.4. : * Remove the pistons from all the rate of diffusion of solids and liquids. Due to syringes. high speed of particles and large space . Leaving one syringe untouched, fill between them. gases show the property of water in the second and pieces of chalk diffusing very fast into other gases. in the third. In the gaseous state, the particles move ¢ Insert the pistons back into the about randomly at high speed. Due to this syringes. You may apply some vaseline random movement, the particles hit each on the Pistons hetore merlin them other and also the walls of the container. The into the syringes for (heir smoot pressure exerted by the gas is because of this movement. « force exerted by gas particles per unit area . Now, try to compress the content by he walls of the container pushing the piston in each syringe. on the walls of the container, aodteee er Soehess 4 Piston =—= Settese Solid soettese P2222225 <> ‘ fe A a) Cy * Liquid (bl Gas R (ruber cork Oa wee ay ( Fig. 1.4 Gas . What do you observe? In which case Pig. 1.5: ab and ¢ show the magnified schematic was the piston easily pushed in? pictures of the three states of matier, The . What do you infer from vour motion of the particles can be seen and observations? conipared in the three states of walter. Marten in Oon StRROO SINGS 5 Reprint 2025 26

[Page 6]
SCIENCE6 1.4.1 EFFECT OF CHANGE OF TEMPERATURE Activity _____________1.12 • Take about 150 g of ice in a beaker and suspend a laboratory thermometer so that its bulb is in contact with the ice, as in Fig. 1.6. uestions 1. The mass per unit volume of a substance is called density. (density = mass/volume). Arrange the following in order of increasing density – air, exhaust from chimneys, honey, water , chalk, cotton and iron. 2. (a) Tabulate the dif ferences in the characterisitcs of states of matter. (b) Comment upon the following: rigidity, compr essibility, fluidity, filling a gas container , shape, kinetic energy and density. 3. Give reasons (a) A gas fills completely the vessel in which it is kept. (b) A gas exerts pressure on the walls of the container. (c) A wooden table should be called a solid. (d) We can easily move our hand in air but to do the same through a solid block of wood we need a karate expert. 4. Liquids generally have lower density as compar ed to solids. But you must have observed that ice floats on water. Find out why. 1.4 Can Matter Change its State? We all know from our observation that water can exist in three states of matter– • solid, as ice, • liquid, as the familiar water, and • gas, as water vapour. What happens inside the matter during this change of state? What happens to the particles of matter during the change of states? How does this change of state take place? We need answers to these questions, isn’t it? Q (a) (b) Fig. 1.6: (a) Conversion of ice to water, (b) conversion of water to water vapour Reprint 2025-26
(i westions 1.4.1 EeFECT OF CHANGE OF TEMPERATURE | 1 i mass pe r tant volunic of a Activity 1.12 substance is called density. TTT {density - nraiss/voluime). ¢ Take about 150 g of ice in a beaker and | Arrange the tollowing in order of suspend a laboratory thermometer so UJ increasing density - air, exhaust that us bulb is in contact with the ice, from chininevs, honev. water. asin Fig, 1.6. chalk. cotton and iron, 2 fa) Tabulate the ditfercnecs in the charactcrisites of states of niatter. Iron. (bh) Comment upon the following: stand . [ Thermometer rigidity. compressibility. Ont jase p— Glass stirrer Quidit. filling a gas i container, shape, kinctic i] encr)ev and density. —} 3 Give reasons Beaker fa) A gas fills completely the lee vessel in which itis kept. es (bh) A gas exerts pressure on the i Walls of Che container. TS Burner fe) A wooden table should be ’ called a solid. Cs fd) Weean casilv move our hand 7 in-air but to do the same fa) through a solid block of wood we need a karate cxpert. 4. Liquids generally have lowcr | density as comparcd ta solids. Iron: . ; But vou must have observed Chait stand | {. Thermometer ice Moats on water. Find out why. OY [Izs=+ J Glass stirrer 14 Can Matter Change its State? — Beaker We all know from our observation that water wii Water can exist in three states of matter- ‘ = . solid, as ice. a © — hqunid, as the familiar water, and 3 Burner * gas, as water vapour. What happens inside the matter during a this change of state? What happens to the particles of matter during the change of Oo} states? How does this change of state take place? We need answers to these questions, Fig. 1.6: (a) Conversion of ice to water, (b] conversion isn’t it? of water fo water vapour 6 Science. : Reprint 2025 26