[Page 7]
MATTER IN O UR S URROUNDING S 7 • Start heating the beaker on a low flame. • Note the temperature when the ice starts melting. • Note the temperature when all the ice has converted into water. • Recor d your observations for this conversion of solid to liquid state. • Now, put a glass rod in the beaker and heat while stirring till the water starts boiling. • Keep a careful eye on the thermometer reading till most of the water has vaporised. • Recor d your observations for the conversion of water in the liquid state to the gaseous state. On increasing the temperature of solids, the kinetic energy of the particles increases. Due to the incr ease in kinetic ener gy, the particles start vibrating with gr eater speed. The energy supplied by heat overcomes the forces of attraction between the particles. The particles leave their fixed positions and start moving more freely. A stage is reached when the solid melts and is converted to a liquid. The minimum temperature at which a solid melts to become a liquid at the atmospheric pressure is called its melting point. The melting point of a solid is an indication of the strength of the force of attraction between its particles. The melting point of ice is 273.15 K*. The process of melting, that is, change of solid state into liquid state is also known as fusion. When a solid melts, its temperature remains the same, so where does the heat energy go? You must have observed, during the experiment of melting, that the temperature of the system does not change after the melting point is reached, till all the ice melts. This happens even though we continue to heat the beaker, that is, we continue to supply heat. This heat gets used up in changing the state by overcoming the forces of attraction between the particles. As this heat energy is absorbed by ice without showing any rise in temperatur e, it is consider ed that it gets hidden into the contents of the beaker and is known as the latent heat. The wor d latent means hidden. The amount of heat ener gy that is required to change 1 kg of a solid into liquid at atmospheric pressure at its melting point is known as the latent heat of fusion. So, particles in water at 0oC (273 K) have more energy as compared to particles in ice at the same temperature. When we supply heat ener gy to water , particles start moving even faster. At a certain temperature, a point is r eached when the particles have enough energy to break fr ee from the forces of attraction of each other. At this temperature the liquid starts changing into gas. The temperature at which a liquid starts boiling at the atmospheric pressure is known as its boiling point. Boiling is a bulk phenomenon. Particles from the bulk of the liquid gain enough energy to change into the vapour state. For water this temperature is 373 K (100oC = 273 + 100 = 373 K). Can you define the latent heat of vaporisation? Do it in the same way as we have defined the latent heat of fusion. Particles in steam, that is, water vapour at 373 K (1000 C) have more energy than water at the same temperatur e. This is because particles in steam have absorbed extra energy in the form of latent heat of vaporisation. *Note: Kelvin is the SI unit of temperature, 0o C =273.15 K. For convenience, we take 0o C = 273 K after rounding off the decimal. To change a temperature on the Kelvin scale to the Celsius scale you have to subtract 273 from the given temperature, and to convert a temperature on the Celsius scale to the Kelvin scale you have to add 273 to the given temperature. So, we infer that the state of matter can be changed into another state by changing the temperature. We have lear nt that substances ar ound us change state from solid to liquid and from liquid to gas on application of heat. But there Reprint 2025-26
¢ — Start heating the beaker on a low flame. state by overcoming the forces of attraction ¢ Note the temperature when the ice between the particles. As this heat energy is starts melting. absorbed by ice without showing any rise in ¢ Note the temperature when all the ice temperature, it is considered that it gets has converted into water. hidden into the contents of the beaker and is ¢ Record your observations for this known as the latent heat. The word latent conversion of solid to liquid state. means hidden. The amount of heat energy * Now, puta glass red in the heaker and that is required to change 1 kg of a solid into heat while stirring ull the water starts liquid at atmospheric pressure at its melting ° Keep a earetul eve on the thermometer point is Known as the latent heat of fusion. ae - : Sage P So, particles in water at 0°C (273 K) have more reading till most of the water has vaporised. energy as compared to particles in ice at the . Record your observations for the same temperature, conversion of water in the liquid state When we supply heat energy to water, to the gaseous state. particles start moving even faster. At a certain temperature, a point is reached when the On increasing the temperature of solids. — particles have enough energy to break free the kinetic energy of the particles increases. from the forces of attraction of each other. At Due to the increase in kinetic energy, the — this temperature the liquid starts changing particles start vibrating with greater speed. — into gas. The temperature at which a liquid The energy supplied by heat overcomes the — starts boiling at the atmospheric pressure is forces of attraction between the particles. The — Known as its boiling point. Boiling is a bulk particles leave their fixed positions and start Phenomenon. Particles from the bulk of the moving more freely. A stage is reached when __ liquid gain enough energy to change into the the solid melts and is converted to a liquid, Vapour state. The minimum temperature at which a solid For water this temperature is 373 K melts to become a liquid at the atmospheric (100°C = 273 + 100 = 373 K). pressure is called its melting point. Can you define the latent heat of i vaporisation? Do it in the same way as we The melting point ofa solid is an indication have defined the latent heat of fusion. of the strength of the force of attraction Particles in steam, that is. water vapour at between its particles. 373 K (100°C) have more energy than water at the same temperature. This is because The melting point of ice is 273.15 K*. The particles in steam have absorbed extra energy process of melting, that is, change of solid in the form of latent heat of vaporisation. state into liquid state is also known as fusion. When a solid melts, its temperature Heat Heat remains the same, so where does the heat. _— [Haw State] energy go? Cool Cool You must have observed, during the experiment of melting, that the temperature So, we infer that the state of matter can of the system does not change after the — be changed into another state by changing melting point is reached, till all the ice melts. the temperature. This happens even though we continue to We have learnt that substances around heat the beaker, that is, we continue to supply us change state from solid to liquid and from heat. This heat gets used up in changing the — liquid to gas on application of heat. But there *Note: Kelvin is the SI unit of temperature, OC -273.15 K. For convenience, we take 0° C - 273 K after rounding off the decimal. To change a temperature on the Kelvin scale to the Celsius scale you have to subtract 273 from the given temperature, and to convert a temperature on the Celsius scale to the Kelvin scale vou have to add 273 to the given lemperature. Marten iw Otk Strrotxpixncs 7 Reprint 2025 26 :

[Page 8]
SCIENCE8 enclosed in a cylinder? Will the particles come closer? Do you think that increasing or decreasing the pressure can change the state of matter? are some that change directly from solid state to gaseous state and vice versa without changing into the liquid state. Activity _____________1.13 • Take some camphor. Crush it and put it in a china dish. • Put an inverted funnel over the china dish. • Put a cotton plug on the stem of the funnel, as shown in Fig. 1.7. * atmosphere (atm) is a unit of measuring pressure exerted by a gas. The unit of pressure is Pascal (Pa): 1 atmosphere = 1.01 × 105 Pa. The pressure of air in atmosphere is called atmospheric pressure. The atmospheric pressure at sea level is 1 atmosphere, and is taken as the normal atmospheric pressure. Fig. 1.7: Sublimation of camphor Fig. 1.8: By applying pressure, particles of matter can be brought close together Applying pressure and reducing temperature can liquefy gases. Have you hear d of solid carbon dioxide (CO2)? It is stored under high pressure. Solid CO2 gets converted directly into gaseous state on decr ease of pr essure to 1 atmospher e* without coming into liquid state. This is the reason that solid carbon dioxide is also known as dry ice. Thus, we can say that pr essur e and temperature deter mine the state of a substance, whether it will be solid, liquid or gas. • Now, heat slowly and observe. • What do you infer from the above activity? A change of state directly from solid to gas without changing into liquid state is called sublimation and the direct change of gas to solid without changing into liquid is called deposition. 1.4.2 EFFECT OF CHANGE OF PRESSURE We have already learnt that the difference in various states of matter is due to the dif ference in the distances between the constituent particles. What will happen when we start putting pressure and compress a gas Fig. 1.9: Interconversion of the three states of matter Deposition Reprint 2025-26
are some that change directly from solid state enclosed in a cylinder? Will the particles come lo gaseous state and vice versa without — closer? Do you think that increasing or changing into the liquid state. decreasing the pressure can change the state of matter? Activity 1.13 ¢ ‘Take some camphor. Crush it and put Mieton . Piston Piston it in a china dish. vlinder (vlinder Cyhnder . Put an inverted funnel over the china dish. . Put a cotton plug on the stem of the funnel, as shown in Fig. 1.7. C f —!, ; ‘otton phi | Ca) les Inverted fonnel Camphor mo Camphor , . apours \ f 0 woteitied Pig. 1.8: By applying pressure, particles of matter 4 \ can be brought close together / . \ . y Applying pressure and reducing > See ag China dist temperature van liquefy gases. a Have you heard of solid carbon dioxide | ca (CO,)? It is stored under high pressure. Solid JY , = Burner CO, gets converted directly into gaseous state fi © \ on decrease of pressure to 1 atmosphere“ oe without coming into liquid state. This is the Fig. 1.7: Sublimation of camphor reason that solid carbon dioxide is also known . as dry ice. ° Now, heat slowly and observe. Thus. we can say that pressure and . What do you infer from the above activity? temperature determine the state of a . substance, whether it will be solid. liquid Achange of state directly from solid to gas BAS. without changing into liquid state is called sublimation and the direct change of gas to Liquid ‘ solid without changing into liquid is called S . <n, deposition. S/S ONN, S %, ¢ xs > 1.4.2 EFFECT OF CHANGE OF PRESSURE ° *y Sublimauion We have already learnt that the difference in Solid <2 Gas various states of matter is due to the Deposition difference in the distances between the constituent particles. What will happen when we start putting pressure and compress a gas Fig. 1.9: interconversion of the three states of matter atmosphere {atm is a unit of measuring pressure exerted by a gas. The unit of pressure is Pascal (Pa): 1 atmosphere - 1.01. 10° Pa. The pressure of air in atmosphere is called atmospheric pressure. The atmospheric pressure at sea level is | atmosphere, and is taken as the normal atmospheric pressure. 8 Science. : Reprint 2025 26