[Page 9]
MATTE R IN O UR S URRO UN DING S 9 99 99 • Record the room temperature. • Record the time or days taken for the evaporation process in the above cases. • Repeat the above three steps of activity on a rainy day and record your observations. • What do you infer about the ef fect of temperature, surface area and wind velocity (speed) on evaporation? You must have observed that the rate of evaporation increases with– • an increase of surface area: We know that evaporation is a surface phenomenon. If the surface area is increased, the rate of evaporation increases. For example, while putting clothes for drying up we spread them out. • an increase of temperature: With the increase of temperature, more number of particles get enough kinetic energy to go into the vapour state. • a decrease in humidity: Humidity is the amount of water vapour present in air. The air around us cannot hold more than a definite amount of water vapour at a given temperature. If the amount of water in air is already high, the rate of evaporation decreases. • an increase in wind speed: It is a common observation that clothes dry faster on a windy day . With the increase in wind speed, the particles of water vapour move away with the wind, decreasing the amount of water vapour in the surrounding. 1.5.2 HOW DOES EVAPORATION CAUSE COOLING? In an open vessel, the liquid keeps on evaporating. The particles of liquid absorb energy from the surrounding to regain the energy lost during evaporation. This absorption of energy from the surroundings make the surroundings cold. uestions 1. Convert the following temperature to celsius scale: a. 300 K b. 573 K 2. What is the physical state of water at: a. 250oC b. 100oC ? 3. For any substance, why does the temperature remain constant during the change of state? 4. Suggest a method to liquefy atmospheric gases. 1.5 Evaporation Do we always need to heat or change pressure for changing the state of matter? Can you quote some examples from everyday life where change of state from liquid to vapour takes place without the liquid reaching the boiling point? Water, when left uncovered, slowly changes into vapour. Wet clothes dry up. What happens to water in the above two examples? We know that particles of matter are always moving and are never at rest. At a given temperature in any gas, liquid or solid, there are particles with different amounts of kinetic energy. In the case of liquids, a small fraction of particles at the surface, having higher kinetic energy, is able to break away from the forces of attraction of other particles and gets converted into vapour. This phenomenon of change of liquid into vapours at any temperature below its boiling point is called evaporation. 1.5.1 FACTORS AFFECTING EVAPORATION Let us understand this with an activity. Activity _____________ 1.14 • Take 5 mL of water in a test tube and keep it near a window or under a fan. • Take 5 mL of water in an open china dish and keep it near a window or under a fan. • Take 5 mL of water in an open china dish and keep it inside a cupboard or on a shelf in your class. Q Reprint 2025-26
“ha : Record the room temperature. resth ° F N) ue sl Jus . Record the time or days taken for the ) 2. Convert the folowing evaporation process in the above cases. temperature to celsius scale: ° Repeat the above three steps of activity a, 300K b, 573K on a rainy day and record your | 2. What is the physical state of observations, UJ water at: ¢ = What do you infer about the effect of a. 2506 b. 100°C ? ternperature, surface area and wind 3.) Forany substance, why does the velocity (speed) on evaporation? feniperalure remain constant You must have observed that the rate of during the change of state? . . wo gey . . evaporation increases with— 4. Sugeest a method to liquety . pee see ob vecenes . * an increase of surface area: atmospheric gases. oo, We know that evaporation is a surface . phenomenon. If the surface area is 1.5 Evaporation increased, the rate of evaporation Do we always need to heat or change pressure increases. For example, while putting for changing the state of matter? Can you clothes for drying up we spread ther quote sore examples from everyday life where out. change of state from liquid to vapour takes * — anincrease of temperature: place without the liquid reaching the boiling With the increase of temperature, more point? Water, when left uncovered, slowly number of particles get enough kinetic changes into vapour. wet clothes dry up. wna energy to go into the vapour state. lappens to water in the al yove two exainples? © adecrease in humidity: We know that particles of matter are . o . . Humidity is the arnount of water vapour always moving and are never at rest. At a given : 4 . oe Aaa eds solid fl present in air. The air around us cannot temperature in any gas, liquid or solid, there hold ‘ lefini f are particles with different amounts of kinetic told more than a definite amount o| energy. In the case of liquids, a small fraction water vapour at a given temperature. If of particles at the surface, having higher the amount of water in air is already kinetic energy, is able to break away from the high. the rate of evaporation decreases. forces of attraction of other particles and gets & an increase in wind speed: converted into vapour. This phenomenon of It is a Common observation that clothes change of liquid into vapours at any dry faster on a windy day. With the ternperature below its boiling point is called increase in wind speed, the particles of evaporation. water vapour tnove away with the wind, 1.5.1 FACTORS AFFECTING EVAPORATION decreasing the amount of water vapour in the surrounding. Let us understand this with an activity. Activity iC 1.5.2 How DOES EVAPORATION CAUSE COOLING? . Take 5 ml. of water in a test tube and , keep it near a window or under a fan. In an open vessel, the liquid keeps on ¢ Take 5 mL of water in an open china evaporating, The particles of liquid absorb dish and keep it near a window or nergy from Le seat . under a fan. energy froin the surrounding to regain the ° Take 5 mL of water in an open china energy lost during evaporation. This dish and keep it inside a cupboard or absorption of energy from the surroundings on a shelf in your class. make the surroundings cold. Marren in Ock SURROUNDINGS 9 Reprint 2025 26

[Page 10]
SCIENCE10 What you have learnt • Matter is made up of small particles. • The matter around us exists in three states—solid, liquid and gas. • The forces of attraction between the particles are maximum in solids, intermediate in liquids and minimum in gases. • The spaces in between the constituent particles and kinetic energy of the particles ar e minimum in the case of solids, intermediate in liquids and maximum in gases. What happens when you pour some acetone (nail polish remover) on your palm? The particles gain energy from your palm or surroundings and evaporate causing the palm to feel cool. After a hot sunny day, people sprinkle water on the r oof or open gr ound because the lar ge latent heat of vaporisation of water helps to cool the hot surface. Can you cite some mor e examples fr om daily life where we can feel the effect of cooling due to evaporation? Why should we wear cotton clothes in summer? During summer , we perspir e mor e because of the mechanism of our body which keeps us cool. W e know that during evaporation, the particles at the sur face of the liquid gain energy from the surroundings or body surface and change into vapour. The heat ener gy equal to the latent heat of vaporisation is absorbed fr om the body leaving the body cool. Cotton, being a good absorber of water helps in absorbing the sweat and exposing it to the atmosphere for easy evaporation. Why do we see water droplets on the outer surface of a glass containing ice-cold water? Let us take some ice-cold water in a tumbler. Soon we will see water dr oplets on the outer sur face of the tumbler. The water vapour present in air, on coming in contact with the cold glass of water, loses energy and gets converted to liquid state, which we see as water droplets. uestions 1. Why does a desert cooler cool better on a hot dry day? 2. How does the water kept in an earthen pot (matka) become cool during summer? 3. Why does our palm feel cold when we put some acetone or petrol or perfume on it? 4. Why are we able to sip hot tea or milk faster from a saucer rather than a cup? 5. What type of clothes should we wear in summer? Q Reprint 2025-26
What happens when you pour some Why do we see water droplets on the outer acetone (nail polish remover) on your palm? — surface of a glass containing ice-cold The particles gain energy from your palm or — water? surroundings and evaporate causing the palm Let us take some ice-cold water in a to feel cool. tumbler. Soon we will see water droplets on After a hot sunny day. people sprinkle — the outer surface of the tumbler. The water water on the roof or open ground because — vapour present in air, on coming in contact the large latent heat of vaporisation of water — with the cold glass of water, loses energy and helps to cool the hot surface. gets converted to liquid state. which we see Can you cite some more examples from as water droplets. daily life where we can feel the effect of cooling ms i 9 whe . due to evaporation? vestious Why should we wear cotton clothes in | summer? \ 1. Why does a desert coolcr cool During summer, we perspire more beater ona hot diy dav? because of the mechanism of our body which 2. How does dic water kept in an keeps us cool. We know that during | earthen pot finathal become cool evaporation, the particles at the surface of UJ daring summer? the liquid gain energy from the surroundings 3 Why docs our palm tec) cold or body surface and change into vapour. The When We put sonic acctone or heat energy equal to the latent heat of petrolor pertuine on it? vaporisation is absorbed from the body 4. Why are we able to sip hot tea or leaving the body cool. Cotton, being a good milk faster from a sauecr rather absorber of water helps in absorbing the than a cup? . sweat and exposing it to the atmosphere for 5. What wpe of clathes should we easy evaporation. Weer i) sumuner? [)} What ™,, you have eC FON kets | Sn ms learnt a 4 ° Matter is made up of small particles. ° The matter around us exists in three states—solid, liquid and gas. ° The forces of attraction between the particles are maximum in solids, intermediate in liquids and minimum in gases. ° The spaces in between the constituent particles and kinetic energy of the particles are minimum in the case of solids, intermediate in liquids and maximum. in gases. 10 Science. Reprint 2025 26