[Page 11]
MATTER IN O UR S URROUNDING S 11 • The arrangement of particles is most ordered in the case of solids, in the case of liquids layers of particles can slip and slide over each other while for gases, ther e is no or der, particles just move about randomly. • The states of matter are inter-convertible. The state of matter can be changed by changing temperature or pressure. • Sublimation is the change of solid state directly to gaseous state without going through liquid state. • Deposition is the change of gaseous state directly to solid state without going through liquid state. • Boiling is a bulk phenomenon. Particles from the bulk (whole) of the liquid change into vapour state. • Evaporation is a surface phenomenon. Particles from the surface gain enough energy to overcome the forces of attraction present in the liquid and change into the vapour state. • The rate of evaporation depends upon the surface area exposed to the atmospher e, the temperatur e, the humidity and the wind speed. • Evaporation causes cooling. • Latent heat of vaporisation is the heat energy required to change 1 kg of a liquid to gas at atmospheric pressure at its boiling point. • Latent heat of fusion is the amount of heat energy required to change 1 kg of solid into liquid at its melting point. • Some measurable quantities and their units to remember: Quantity Unit Symbol Temperature kelvin K Length metre m Mass kilogram kg Weight newton N Volume cubic metre m3 Density kilogram per cubic metre kg m–3 Pressure pascal Pa Reprint 2025-26
° The arrangement of particles is most ordered in the case of solids, in the case of liquids layers of particles can slip and slide over each other while for gases, there is no order, particles just move about randomly. ° The states of matter are inter-convertible. The state of matter ean be changed by changing temperature or pressure. ° Sublimation is the change of solid state directly to gaseous state without going through liquid state. ° Deposition is the change of gaseous state directly to solid state without going through liquid state. ° Boiling is a bulk phenomenon. Particles from the bulk (whole) of the liquid change into vapour state. ° Evaporation is a surface phenomenon. Particles from the surface gain enough energy to overcome the forces of attraction present in the liquid and change into the vapour state. ° The rate of evaporation depends upon the surface area exposed to the atmosphere, the temperature, the humidity and the wind speed. ° Evaporation causes cooling. ° Latent heat of vaporisation is the heat energy required to change 1 kg of a liquid to gas at atmospheric pressure at its boiling point. ° Latent heat of fusion is the amount of heat energy required to change | kg of solid into liquid at its melting point. ° Some measurable quantities and their units to remember: emperature kelvin K Length metre m Mass kilogram kg Weight newton N Volume cubic metre m? Density Kilogram per cubic metre kgm? Pressure pascal Pa Marien is OK St rkot xpinas 1 Reprint 2025 26

[Page 12]
SCIENCE12 1. Convert the following temperatures to the celsius scale. (a) 293 K (b) 470 K 2. Convert the following temperatures to the kelvin scale. (a) 25o°C (b) 373o°C 3. Give reason for the following observations. (a) Naphthalene balls disappear with time without leaving any solid. (b) We can get the smell of perfume sitting several metres away. 4. Arrange the following substances in increasing order of forces of attraction between the particles— water, sugar, oxygen. 5. What is the physical state of water at— (a) 25o°C (b) 0o°C (c) 100o°C ? 6. Give two reasons to justify— (a) water at room temperature is a liquid. (b) an iron almirah is a solid at room temperature. 7. Why is ice at 273 K more effective in cooling than water at the same temperature? 8. What produces more severe burns, boiling water or steam? 9. Name A,B,C,D,E and F in the following diagram showing change in its state Exercises Reprint 2025-26
. Ls )s«Exercises faa 1. Convert the following temperatures to the celsius scale. iF a (a) 293 K (b) 470 K . < 2. Convert the following temperatures to the kelvin scale. = (a) 25°C (b) 373° C 3. Give reason for the following observations. (a) Naphthalene balls disappear with time without leaving any solid. (b) We can get the smell of perfume sitting several metres away. 4. Arrange the following substances in increasing order of forces of attraction between the particles— water, sugar, oxygen. 5. What is the physical state of water at— (a) 25°C (b) OFC (ce) 100°C ? 6. Give two reasons to justify— (a) water at room temperature is a liquid. (b) an iron almirah is a solid at room temperature. 7. Why is ice at 273 K more effective in cooling than water at the same temperature? 8. What produces more severe burns, boiling water or steam’? 9. Name A.B.C,D.E and F in the following diagram showing change in its state Increase heat and > decrease pressure GouDys—~——* Cutguib gC as > D — Cc Decrease heat and < increase pressure [7 7 12 Sewxer, Reprint 2025 26

[Page 13]
MATTER IN O UR S URROUNDING S 13 Group Activity Prepare a model to demonstrate movement of particles in solids, liquids and gases. For making this model you will need • A transparent jar • A big rubber balloon or piece of stretchable rubber sheet • A string • Few chickpeas or black gram or dry green peas. How to make? • Put the seeds in the jar. • Sew the string to the centre of the rubber sheet and put some tape to keep it tied securely. • Stretch and tie the rubber sheet on the mouth of the jar . • Your model is ready. Now run your fingers up and d own the string by first tugging at it slowly and then rapidly. Fig. 1.10: A model for converting of solid to liquid and liquid to gas. Reprint 2025-26
oe (|) «Group Activity a, y 2 Prepare a model to demonstrate movement of particles in solids. Qk 2 liqnids and gases. ee For making this model you will need SSSR M/A transparent jar _ ° A big rubber balloon or piece of stretchable rubber sheet ° A string ° Few chickpeas or black gram or dry green peas. How to make? ° Put the seeds in the jar. ° Sew the string to the centre of the rubber sheet and put some tape to keep it tied securely. 3 Stretch and tie the rubber sheet on the mouth of the jar. ° Your model is ready. Now run your fingers up and down the string by first tugging at it slowly and then rapidly. Transparent dar . wee, See 2B, (—— ee f ° ‘» 4 q ‘a H PC 4 P / Dried grains eA aA ge an ' Ao Pullthe string > ae fest stuwly, Uke as B W cigorouels to . ag yay show movement 1c ee Dy, oof pagtivles as big thallact: oe “Sree {@ a side, hounds " Tange: nace! f JP hd gases Lt oe W {/ Fig. 1.10: A model for converting of solid to liquid and liquid to gas. Marien is OK St rkot xpinas 13 Reprint 2025 26