[Page 3]
MATTER IN O UR S URROUNDING S 3 • If we consider each student as a particle of matter, then in which group the particles held each other with the maximum force? Activity ______________ 1.7 • Take an iron nail, a piece of chalk and a rubber band. • Try breaking them by hammering, cutting or stretching. • In which of the above three substances do you think the particles are held together with greater force? Activity ______________ 1.8 • Take some water in a container , try cutting the surface of water with your fingers. • Were you able to cut the sur face of water? • What could be the reason behind the surface of water remaining together? The above three activities (1.6, 1.7 and 1.8) suggest that particles of matter have force acting between them. This force keeps the particles together. The strength of this force of attraction varies from one kind of matter to another. uestions 1. Which of the following are matter? Chair , air , love, smell, hate, almonds, thought, cold, lemon water, smell of perfume. 2. Give reasons for the following observation: The smell of hot sizzling food reaches you several metres away, but to get the smell from cold food you have to go close. 3. A diver is able to cut through water in a swimming pool. Which property of matter does this observation show? 4. What are the characteristics of the particles of matter? Particles of matter are continuously moving, that is, they possess what we call the kinetic energy. As the temperature rises, particles move faster. So, we can say that with increase in temperature the kinetic energy of the particles also increases. In the above thr ee activities we observe that particles of matter intermix on their own with each other. They do so by getting into the spaces between the particles. This intermixing of particles of two different types of matter on their own is called diffusion. We also observe that on heating, dif fusion becomes faster. Why does this happen? 1.2.3 PARTICLES OF MATTER ATTRACT EACH OTHER Activity ______________ 1.6 • Play this game in the field— make four groups and for m human chains as suggested: • The first group should hold each other from the back and lock arms like Idu-Mishmi dancers (Fig. 1.3). Fig. 1.3 • The second group should hold hands to form a human chain. • The third gr oup should for m a chain by touching each other with only their finger tips. • Now, the fourth gr oup of students should run around and try to break the three human chains one by one into as many small groups as possible. • Which group was the easiest to break? Why? Q Reprint 2025-26
Particles of matter are continuously «If we consider cach student as a moving, that is, they possess what we call particle of matter, then in which group the Kinetic energy. As the temperature rises. the part icles held each other with the particles move faster. So, we can say that with maximum force? increase in temperature the kinetic energy of lo - the particles also increases. Activity 1.7 In the above three activities we observe os - z . that particles of matter intermi their . Take an iron nail, a piece of chalk and at particles o} ma er intermix on their own a rubber band. with each other. They do so by getting into ¢ Try breaking them by hammering, the spaces between the particles, This cutting or stretching. intermixing of particles of two different types . In which of the above three of matter on their own is called diffusion. We substances do you think the particles also observe that on heating, diffusion are held together with greater force? becomes faster. Why does this happen? aan 5 Activity _ 1.8 1.2.3 PARTICLES OF MATTER ATTRACT on seg ee . Take some water in a container, try EACH OTHER cutting the surface of water with your fingers. Activity 1.6 ¢ Were you able to cut the surface of . water? ° Play this game in the field— make four ° What could be the reason behind the groups and form human chains as surface of water remaining together? supeested: on . . The first group should hold each The above three activities (1.6. 1.7 and 1.8) other from the back and lock arms suggest that particles of matter have force like Idu-Mishmi dancers (Fig. 1.3). acting between them. This force keeps the particles together. The strength of this force of attraction varies from one kind of matter to ~~ 0 Oe ‘e 2 another. S § Ms. Bhd eS os als oi we MM , Hestions : ye 7 a . | by ‘ ‘ , ‘ . : pS t | 44 1 Which of the following are ed y fH wo 3 i , syed ThA Tm feat Been ve mMatlter? eer We Sh o Pes a (eras Chair. air. love, smichl. hate aM YE Joe vaste | almonds. thought, cold, lenin ° ww Water, smell of pertiane. rig. 1.3 2. Give reasons for the tollowing observation: ¢ The second group should hold hands Phe smicil of hot sizaling food to form a human chain. reaches vou several metres . The third group should form a chain awa. bat to get the smell from by touching each other with only their cold food vou have to go close. finger ips. OA diver is able ta cut dirough . Now, the fourth group of students Water ina swimming pool. Which should run around and try to break the property of matter docs this three human chains one hy one into “. oy * nc observation show? as many small groups as possible. Vv, the . spetigns nf’ ¢ Which group was the easiest to break? A What cue Fc charac teristics ot Why? the particics of matter? Marten iw Otk Strrotxpixncs 3 Reprint 2025 26

[Page 4]
SCIENCE4 1.3 States of Matter Observe different types of matter around you. What are its different states? We can see that matter ar ound us exists in thr ee dif ferent states– solid, liquid and gas. These states of matter arise due to the variation in the characteristics of the particles of matter. Now, let us study about the properties of these three states of matter in detail. 1.3.1 THE SOLID STATE Activity _____________ 1.9 • Collect the following articles — a pen, a book, a needle and a piece of wooden stick. • Sketch the shape of the above articles in your notebook by moving a pencil around them. • Do all these have a definite shape, distinct boundaries and a fixed volume? • What happens if they are hammered, pulled or dropped? • Are these capable of diffusing into each other? • Try compr essing them by applying force. Are you able to compress them? All the above ar e examples of solids. W e can observe that all these have a definite shape, distinct boundaries and fixed volumes, that is, have negligible compressibility. Solids have a tendency to maintain their shape when subjected to outside force. Solids may break under force but it is difficult to change their shape, so they are rigid. Consider the following: (a) What about a rubber band, can it change its shape on stretching? Is it a solid? (b) What about sugar and salt? When kept in different jars these take the shape of the jar. Are they solid? (c) What about a sponge? It is a solid yet we are able to compr ess it. Why? All the above are solids as: • A rubber band changes shape under force and regains the same shape when the force is removed. If excessive force is applied, it breaks. • The shape of each individual sugar or salt crystal r emains fixed, whether we take it in our hand, put it in a plate or in a jar. • A sponge has minute holes, in which air is trapped, when we press it, the air is expelled out and we ar e able to compress it. 1.3.2 THE LIQUID STATE Activity _____________1.10 • Collect the following: (a) water, cooking oil, milk, juice, a cold drink. (b) containers of different shapes. Put a 50 mL mark on these containers using a measuring cylinder fr om the laboratory. • What will happen if these liquids ar e spilt on the floor? • Measure 50 mL of any one liquid and transfer it into different containers one by one. Does the volume r emain the same? • Does the shape of the liquid remain the same ? • When you pour the liquid fr om one container into another , does it flow easily? We observe that liquids have no fixed shape but have a fixed volume. They take up the shape of the container in which they are kept. Liquids flow and change shape, so they are not rigid but can be called fluid. Refer to activities 1.4 and 1.5 wher e we saw that solids and liquids can dif fuse into liquids. The gases fr om the atmosphere diffuse and dissolve in water . These gases, especially oxygen and carbon dioxide, ar e essential for the survival of aquatic animals and plants. All living cr eatures need to br eathe for survival. The aquatic animals can br eathe under water due to the presence of dissolved oxygen in water. Thus, we may conclude that solids, liquids and gases can diffuse into liquids. The rate of diffusion of liquids is Reprint 2025-26
1.3 States of Matter the force is removed. If excessive force is applied, it breaks. Observe different types of matter around you. ° The shape of each individual sugar or What are its different states’? We can see that salt crystal remains fixed, whether we matter around us exists in three different take it in our hand, put it in a plate or in states- solid. liquid and gas. These states of a jar. matter arise due to the variation in the ¢ A sponge has minute holes, in which characteristics of the particles of matter. air is trapped, when we press it, the air Now, let us study about the properties of is expelled out and we are able to these three states of matter in detail. compress it. 1.3.1 THE SOLID STATE 1.3.2 THE LIQUID STATE Activity 1.9 Activity 1.10 . Collect the following articles — a pen, . Collect the following: a book, a needle and a piece of wooden {a} water, cooking oil. milk, juice, a stick. cold drink. . Sketch the shape of the above articles (b) containers of different shapes. Put in your notebook by moving a pencil a 50 ml. mark on these containers around them. using a measuring cylinder from * [Do all these have a definite shape. the laboratory. distinct boundaries and a fixed volume? ¢ What will happen if these liquids are ¢ What happens if they are hammered. spilt on the floor? pulled or dropped? ° Measure 50 ml. of any one hquid and . Are these capable of diffusing into each transfer it into different containers one other? hy one. Does the volume remain the oT ; same's . t ry compressii® them by applying . Does the shape of the liquid remain the ‘oree, Are you able to compress them? same ? All the above are examples of solids. We ¢ When you pour the liquid from one can observe that all these have a definite container into another, does it Now shape, distinct boundaries and fixed volumes, easily? that is, have negligible compressibility. Solids We observe that liquids have no fixed have a tendency to maintain their shape when — shape but have a fixed volume. They take up subjected to outside force. Solids may break the shape of the container in which they are under force but it is difficult to change their — kept. Liquids flow and change shape. so they shape. so they are rigid. are not rigid but can be called fluid. Consider the following: Refer to activities 1.4 and 1.5 where we i a saw that solids and liquids can diffuse into (a) What about a rubber band, can it liquids. The gases from the atmosphere change its shape on stretching? Is it diffuse and dissolve in water. These gases, a solid’? especially oxygen and carbon dioxide, are (b) What about sugar and salt? When — essential for the survival of aquatic animals kept in different jars these take the — and plants. shape of the jar. Are they solid? All living creatures need to breathe for {c) What about a sponge? It is a solid survival, The aquatic animals can breathe yet we are able to compress it. Why? under water due to the presence of dissolved All the above are solids as: oxygen in water. Thus, we may conclude that * Arubber band changes shape under solids, liquids and gases can diffuse into force and regains the same shape when liquids. The rate of diffusion of liquids is 4 Scmxer : Reprint 2025 26