[Page 9]
SOUND 135 2. Stethoscope is a medical instrument used for listening to sounds produced within the body, mainly in the heart or lungs. In stethoscopes the sound of the patient’s heartbeat reaches the doctor’s ears by multiple reflection of sound, as shown in Fig.11.11. Fig. 11.12: Curved ceiling of a conference hall. Fig. 11.13: Sound board used in a big hall. uestion 1. Why are the ceilings of concert halls curved? 11.4Range of Hearing The audible range of sound for human beings extends from about 20 Hz to 20000 Hz (one Hz = one cycle/s). Children under the age of five and some animals, such as dogs can hear up to 25 kHz (1 kHz = 1000 Hz). As people grow older their ears become less sensitive to higher frequencies. Sounds of frequencies below 20 Hz are called infrasonic sound or infrasound. If we could hear infrasound we would hear the vibrations of a pendulum just as we hear the vibrations of the wings of a bee. Rhinoceroses communicate using infrasound of frequency as low as 5 Hz. Whales and elephants produce sound in the infrasound range. It is observed that some animals get disturbed before earthquakes. Earthquakes produce low-frequency infrasound before the main shock waves begin which possibly alert the animals. Frequencies higher than 20 kHz are called ultrasonic sound or ultrasound. Ultrasound is produced by animals such as dolphins, bats and porpoises. Moths of certain families have very sensitive hearing equipment. These moths can hear the high frequency Q Fig.11.11: Stethoscope 3. Generally the ceilings of concert halls, conference halls and cinema halls are curved so that sound after reflection reaches all corners of the hall, as shown in Fig 1 1.12. Sometimes a curved soundboard may be placed behind the stage so that the sound, after reflecting from the sound board, spreads evenly across the width of the hall (Fig 11.13). In these instruments, a tube followed by a conical opening reflects sound successively to guide most of the sound waves from the source in the forward direction towards the audience. Reprint 2025-26
In these instruments, a tube followed spttetese ess Sound board by a conical opening reflects sound se successively to guide most of the sound waves from the source in the forward direction towards the audience. 2. Stethoscope is a medical instrument used for listening to sounds produced Souree of sound within the body, mainly in the heart or lungs. In stethoscopes the sound of the patient's heartbeat reaches the doctor's ears by multiple reflection of sound. as shown in Fig.1 1.11. Visa ne Oe / Fig. 11.13: Sound board used ina big hall. ‘eet “ ‘ val oy 1 ; a pe yp A fs i. Y | 1. Way are the ceilings of concert Nie : Ceo - 3 halls curved? Fig.11.1 1: Stethoscope 11.4 Range of Hearing 3. Generally the ceilings of concert halls, The audible range of sound for human beings conterence halls and cinema halls are extends from about 20 Hz to 20000 Hz (one curved so that sound after reflection —_H# = one cycle/s). Children under the age of reaches all corners of the hall. as five and some animals, such as dogs can hear shown in Fig 11.12. Sometimes a UP to 25 kHz (1 kHz = 1000 Hz). As people curved soundboard may be placed prow older their ears become less sensitive to behind the stage so that the sound. higher frequencies. Sounds of frequencies after reflecting from the sound board. below 20 Hz are called infrasonic sound or spreads evenly across the width of the infrasound. If we could hear infrasound we hall (Fig 11.13). would hear the vibrations ofa pendulum just 7 as we hear the vibrations of the wings of a bee. Rhinoceroses communicate using infrasound a a aa an of frequency as low as 5 Hz. Whales and 1 we \’ ‘7 \ elephants produce sound in the infrasound i / \ aan uo \ z range. It is observed that some animals get ; J ~% - or S ‘s disturbed before earthquakes. Earthquakes peg po br an produce low-frequency infrasound before the tA oe x ‘y main shock waves begin which possibly alert oy the animals. Frequencies higher than 20 kHz > are called ultrasonic sound or ultrasound. i> Ultrasound is produced by animals such as ! dolphins, bats and porpoises. Moths of certain families have very sensitive hearing equipment. Fig. 11.12: Curved cetling of a conference hall. These moths can hear the high frequency Sovuan 135 Reprint 2025-26 :

[Page 10]
SCIENCE136 squeaks of the bat and know when a bat is flying nearby, and are able to escape capture. Rats also play games by producing ultrasound. Hearing Aid: People with hearing loss may need a hearing aid. A hearing aid is an electronic, battery operated device. The hearing aid receives sound through a microphone. The microphone converts the sound waves to electrical signals. These electrical signals are amplified by an amplifier. The amplified electrical signals are given to a speaker of the hearing aid. The speaker converts the amplified electrical signal to sound and sends to the ear for clear hearing. in construction of big structures like buildings, bridges, machines and also scientific equipment. The cracks or holes inside the metal blocks, which are invisible from outside reduces the strength of the structure. Ultrasonic waves are allowed to pass through the metal block and detectors are used to detect the transmitted waves. If there is even a small defect, the ultrasound gets reflected back indicating the presence of the flaw or defect, as shown in Fig. 11.14. Q Metallic components are generally used uestions 1. What is the audible range of the average human ear? 2. What is the range of frequencies associated with (a) Infrasound? (b) Ultrasound? 11.5Applications of Ultrasound Ultrasounds are high frequency waves. Ultrasounds are able to travel along well- defined paths even in the presence of obstacles. Ultrasounds are used extensively in industries and for medical purposes. • Ultrasound is generally used to clean parts located in hard-to-reach places, for example, spiral tube, odd shaped parts, electronic components, etc. Objects to be cleaned are placed in a cleaning solution and ultrasonic waves are sent into the solution. Due to the high frequency, the particles of dust, grease and dirt get detached and drop out. The objects thus get thoroughly cleaned. • Ultrasounds can be used to detect cracks and flaws in metal blocks. Fig 11.14: Ultrasound is reflected back from the defective locations inside a metal block. Ordinary sound of longer wavelengths cannot be used for such purpose as it will bend around the corners of the defective location and enter the detector. • Ultrasonic waves are made to reflect from various parts of the heart and form the image of the heart. This tech- nique is called ‘echocardiography’. • Ultrasound scanner is an instrument which uses ultrasonic waves for getting images of internal organs of the human body. A doctor may image the patient’s organs, such as the liver, gall bladder, uterus, kidney, etc. It helps the doctor to detect abnormalities, such as stones in the gall bladder and kidney or tumours in different organs. In this technique the ultrasonic waves travel through the tissues of the body and get reflected from a region where there is a change of tissue density. Reprint 2025-26
squeaks of the bat and know when a bat in construction of big structures like is flying nearby, and are able to escape buildings, bridges, machines and also capture. Rats also play games by scientific equipment. The cracks or producing ultrasound. holes inside the metal blocks, which are invisible from outside reduces the strength of the structure. Ultrasonic Hearing Aid: People with hearing loss may waves are allowed to pass through the need a hearing aid. A hearing aid is an metal block and detectors are used to electronic, battery operated device. The detect the transmitted waves. If there hearing aid receives sound through a is even a small defect, the ultrasound microphone. The microphone converts the gets reflected back indicating the sound waves to electrical signals. These presence of the flaw or defect, as shown electrical signals are amplified by an in Fig. 11.14. amplifier. The amplified electrical signals 7 are given to a speaker of the hearing aid. Detect or Maw The speaker converts the amplified 25>)—|"T—™—F"™FVS>P@*@€XTV]+!:-—-—-—V—M—MNCTcCLVV electrical signal to sound and sends to the (J ear for clear hearing. 2 ee fe £ W apoctignare E a () nestions i | | 1. What is the audible range of the LP average haan car? Metal Block \ 2. Whatis the range of Irequcncics Pig 11.14: Ultrasound is reflected back from the AY assoctated With defective locations inside a metal block. fa) Intrasound? {bh} Ulwasound? Ordinary sound of longer wavelengths cannot be used for such purpose as it will 11.5 Applications of Ultrasound bend around the corners of the defective location and enter the detector. Ultrasounds are high frequency waves. e = Ultrasonic waves are made to reflect Ultrasounds are able to travel along well- from various parts of the heart and defined paths even in the presence of form the image of the heart. This tech- obstacles. Ultrasounds are used extensively nique is called ‘echocardiography’. in industries and for medical purposes. e = Ultrasound scanner is an instrument e = Ultrasound is generally used to clean which uses ultrasonic waves for parts located in hard-to-reach places, setting images of internal organs of the for example, spiral tube, odd shaped Bt Be imanes . Bans human body. A doctor may image the parts, electronic components, etc. : ° Objects to be cleaned are placed ina patient’s organs, such as the liver, gall cleaning solution and ultrasonic waves bladder, uterus. kidney, ete. It helps are sent into the solution. Due to the doctor to detect abnormalities, the high frequency. the particles of such as stones in the gall bladder and dust. grease and dirt get detached and kidney or tumours in different organs. drop “out. The objects thus get In this technique the ultrasonic waves thoroughly cleaned. travel through the tissues of the body e «Ultrasounds can be used to detect and get reflected from a region where cracks and flaws in metal blocks. there is a change of Ussue density. 136 Science. Metallic components are generally used Reprint 2025-26