[Page 5]
SOUND 131 131131131131 How the brain interprets the frequency of an emitted sound is called its pitch. The faster the vibration of the source, the higher is the frequency and the higher is the pitch, as shown in Fig. 11.7. Thus, a high pitch sound corresponds to more number of compressions and rarefactions passing a fixed point per unit time. Objects of different sizes and conditions vibrate at different frequencies to produce sounds of different pitch. The magnitude of the maximum disturbance in the medium on either side of the mean value is called the amplitude of the wave. It is usually represented by the letter A, as shown in Fig. 11.6(c). For sound its unit will be that of density or pressure. The loudness or softness of a sound is determined basically by its amplitude. The amplitude of the sound wave depends upon the force with which an object is made to vibrate. If we strike a table lightly, we hear a soft sound because we produce a sound wave density of the medium oscillates between a maximum value and a minimum value. The change in density from the maximum value to the minimum value, then again to the maximum value, makes one complete oscillation. The number of such oscillations per unit time is the frequency of the sound wave. If we can count the number of the compressions or rarefactions that cross us per unit time, we will get the frequency of the sound wave. It is usually represented by n (G reek letter , nu). I ts SI unit is hertz (symbol, Hz). The time taken by two consecutive compressions or rarefactions to cross a fixed point is called the time period of the wave. In other words, we can say that the time taken for one complete oscillation is called the time period of the sound wave. It is represented by the symbol T. Its SI unit is second (s). Frequency and time period are related as follows: A violin and a flute may both be played at the same time in an orchestra. Both sounds travel through the same medium, that is, air and arrive at our ear at the same time. Both sounds travel at the same speed irrespective of the source. But the sounds we receive are dif ferent. This is due to the dif ferent characteristics associated with the sound. Pitch is one of the characteristics. = 1v T Fig. 11.7: Fig. 11.7:Fig. 11.7: Fig. 11.7:Fig. 11.7: Low pitch sound has low frequency and high pitch of sound has high frequency. Fig. 11.8:Fig. 11.8:Fig. 11.8:Fig. 11.8:Fig. 11.8: Soft sound has small amplitude and louder sound has large amplitude. Reprint 2025-26
. . Wave density of the mediurn oscillates between a disturbance maximutn value and a minimum value. The change in density from the maximum value to the minimum value, then again to the Tune maximum value, makes one complete oscillation. The nurnber of such oscillations per unit time is the frequency of the sound wave. If we can count the number of the Wave shape for a low pitched sound compressions or rarefactions that cross us . Wave per unit time, we will get the frequency of disturbance the sound wave. It is usually represented by v (Greek letter, nu). Its Sl unit is hertz . (symbol, Hz). Pune The time taken by two consecutive compressions or rarefactions to cross a fixed point is called the time period of the wave. In . other words, we can say that the time taken Wave shape fora high pitched sound for one complete oscillation is called the time ; period of the sound wave. It is represented by Fig. 11.7: Low pitch sound has low frequency and ihe symbol T. Its SI unit is second (s) high pitch of sound has high frequency. Frequency and titne period are related aS as shown in Fig. 11.6(c). For sound its unit follows: will be that of density or pressure. v= 1 The loudness or softness of a sound is “p detertnined basically by its amplitude. The . amplitude of the sound wave depends upon A violin and a flute may both be played . . . : . 2 the force with which an object is made to at the sare time in an orchestra. Both sounds . . . vibrate. If we strike a table lightly, we hear a travel through the sare medium, that is, air 7 7 . 3, soft sound because we produce a sound wave and arrive at our ear at the same time. Both sounds travel at the same speed irrespective Wave of the source. But the sounds we receive are ésturbance different. This is due to the different characteristics associated with the sound. rine Pitch is one of the characteristics. How the brain interprets the frequency Soft sound of an emitted sound is called its pitch. The faster the vibration of the source, the Ware . . ave higher is the frequency and the higher is ebsturbance the pitch, as shown in Fig. 11.7. Thus, a high pitch sound corresponds to more number of compressions and rarefactions passing a fixed point per unit time. Tone Objects of different sizes and conditions vibrate at different frequencies to produce sounds of different pitch. The magnitude of the maximutn Louder sound disturbance in the medium on either side of the mean value is called the amplitude of the Fig. 11.8: Sot at 1 hited ! vanes «sen aca) ar ceetareveceuriteae) Pace tags Test fee . 11.8: t sound has small amplitude anc wave. It is usually represented by the letter A, louder sound has large amplitude. Sonn 131 Reprint 2025-26

[Page 6]
SCIENCE132 Q Q uestions 1. Which wave property determines (a) loudness, (b) pitch? 2. Guess which sound has a higher pitch: guitar or car horn? The speed of sound is defined as the distance which a point on a wave, such as a compression or a rarefaction, travels per unit time. We know, speed, v = distance / time = λ T Example 11.1 A sound wave has a frequency of 2 kHz and wave length 35 cm. How long will it take to travel 1.5 km? Solution: Given, Frequency, ν = 2 kHz = 2000 Hz Wavelength, λ = 35 cm = 0.35 m We know that speed, v of the wave = wavelength × frequency v = λ ν = 0.35 m 2000 Hz = 700 m/s The time taken by the wave to travel a distance, d of 1.5 km is Thus sound will take 2.1 s to travel a distance of 1.5 km. uestions 1. What are wavelength, frequency, time period and amplitude of a sound wave? 2. How are the wavelength and frequency of a sound wave related to its speed? 3. Calculate the wavelength of a sound wave whose frequency is 220 Hz and speed is 440 m/s in a given medium. 4. A person is listening to a tone of 500 Hz sitting at a distance of 450 m from the source of the sound. What is the time interval between successive compressions from the source? The amount of sound energy passing each second through unit area is called the intensity of sound. W e sometimes use the ter ms “loudness” and “intensity” interchangeably, but they are not the same. Loudness is a measure of the response of the ear to the sound. Even when two sounds are of equal intensity, we may hear one as louder than the other simply because our ear detects it better. of less energy (amplitude). If we hit the table hard we hear a louder sound. Can you tell why? A sound wave spreads out from its source. As it moves away from the source its amplitude as well as its loudness decreases. Louder sound can travel a larger distance as it is associated with higher energy. Fig. 11.8 shows the wave shapes of a loud and a soft sound of the same frequency. The quality or timber of sound is that characteristic which enables us to distinguish one sound from another having the same pitch and loudness. The sound which is more pleasant is said to be of a rich quality. A sound of single frequency is called a tone. The sound which is produced due to a mixture of several frequencies is called a note and is pleasant to listen to. Noise is unpleasant to the ear! Music is pleasant to hear and is of rich quality. Here λ is the wavelength of the sound wave. It is the distance travelled by the sound wave in one time period (T) of the wave. Thus, v = λ ν or v = λ ν That is, speed = wavelength × frequency. The speed of sound remains almost the same for all frequencies in a given medium under the same physical conditions. Reprint 2025-26
of less energy (amplitude). If we hit the table “Example 11.1 A sound wave has a_ hard we hear a louder sound. Can you tell frequency of 2 kHz and wave length why? A sound wave spreads out from its 35 em. How long will it take to travel source. As it moves away from the source its 1.5 km? , amplitude as well as its loudness decreases. Louder sound can travel a larger distance as Solution: it is associated with higher energy. Fig. 11.8 Given. shows the wave shapes of a loud and a soft Frequency, v = 2 kHz = 2000 Hz sound of the same frequency. Wavelength, 2 =35em =0.35m The quality or timber of sound is that We know that speed, vof the wave characteristic which enables us to distinguish = wavelength x frequency one sound from another having the same pitch vekyv ° and loudness. The sound which is more =0.35m 2000 Hz = 700 m/s pleasant is said to be of a rich quality. A sound The time taken by the wave to travel a of single frequency is called a tone. The sound distance, dof 1.5 km is which is produced due to a mixture of several e n frequencies is called a note and is pleasant to t= a = 1.5 x 1000 m = 1s $=2.1s. listen to. Noise is unpleasant to the ear! Music v 700m $7! 7 is pleasant to hear and is of rich quality. Thus sound will take 2.1 5 to travel a distance of 1.5 km. ( westions TT | | 1. Which wave property determines westious < fa) loudness, ih) pitch? . . J oof Wharare wavelength, trequcncy. ' { 2. Guess which sound has a higher time period and amplitude of a Wy, pitch: guitar or car horn? sound wave? | | 2. How are the wavelengih and The speed of sound is defined as the % frequency of a sound Wane ate ca auraiie @ ae « related to its speed? distance which a point on a wave, such as a Calculate the wavelensth of a compression or a rarefaction, travels per unit “ sound wave whose frequency is We now 2202 and speed is d4Oiun/s in ° . . a given mediun, speed. v= distance / time 4. A person is listening to a tone of _ a 5OO Hz sitting at a distance of - T 450m from he source of dic sound, What is the tinic interval Here 7 is the wavelength of the sound wave. It DeAVCCN SUCCCSSIVC CONIPICSSIONS is the distance travelled by the sound wave in front the source? one time period (7) of the wave. Thus. . The amount of sound energy passing each a if LL | second through unit area is called the intensity VEAN . OT | of sound. We sometimes use the terms . “loudness” and “intensity” interchangeably, . or veav . but they are not the same. Loudness is a Phat is, speed = wavelength x frequency. measure of the response of the ear to the sound. The speed of sound remains almost the Even when two sounds are of equal intensity, same for all frequencies in a given medium we may hear one as louder than the other under the same physical conditions. simply because our ear detects it better. 132 Scene : Reprint 2025-26