[Page 13]
SCIENCE138 • Loudness is a physiological response of the ear to the intensity of sound. • The amount of sound energy passing each second through unit area is called the intensity of sound. • The audible range of hearing for average human beings is in the frequency range of 20 Hz – 20 kHz. • Sound waves with frequencies below the audible range are termed “infrasonic” and those above the audible range are termed “ultrasonic”. • Ultrasound has many medical and industrial applications. Exercises 1. What is sound and how is it produced? 2. Describe with the help of a diagram, how compressions and rarefactions are produced in air near a source of sound. 3. Why is sound wave called a longitudinal wave? 4. Which characteristic of the sound helps you to identify your friend by his voice while sitting with others in a dark room? 5. Flash and thunder are produced simultaneously. But thunder is heard a few seconds after the flash is seen, why? 6. A person has a hearing range from 20 Hz to 20 kHz. What are the typical wavelengths of sound waves in air corresponding to these two frequencies? Take the speed of sound in air as 344 m s –1. 7. Two children are at opposite ends of an aluminium rod. One strikes the end of the rod with a stone. Find the ratio of times taken by the sound wave in air and in aluminium to reach the second child. 8. The frequency of a source of sound is 100 Hz. How many times does it vibrate in a minute? 9. Does sound follow the same laws of reflection as light does? Explain. 10. When a sound is reflected from a distant object, an echo is produced. Let the distance between the reflecting surface and the source of sound production remains the same. Do you hear echo sound on a hotter day? 11. Give two practical applications of reflection of sound waves. 12. A stone is dropped from the top of a tower 500 m high into a pond of water at the base of the tower . When is the splash heard at the top? Given, g = 10 m s –2 and speed of sound = 340 m s –1. • Sound properties such as pitch, loudness and quality are determined by the corresponding wave properties. Reprint 2025-26
° Sound properties such as pitch, loudness and quality are determined by the corresponding wave properties. ° Loudness is a physiological response of the car to the intensity of sound. ° The amount of sound energy passing each second through unit area is called the intensity of sound. ° The audible range of hearing for average human beings is in the frequency range of 20 Hz - 20 kHz. ° Sound waves with frequencies below the audible range are termed “infrasonic” and those above the audible range are termed “ultrasonic”. ° Ultrasound has many medical and industrial applications. [ i Exercises roar ae 1. What is sound and how is it produced? A a 2. Describe with the help of a diagram, how compressions and s wy, rarefactions are produced in air near a source of sound. 3. Why is sound wave called a longitudinal wave? 4. Which characteristic of the sound helps you to identify your friend by his voice while sitting with others in a dark room? 5. Flash and thunder are produced simultaneously. But thunder is heard a few seconds after the flash is seen, why? 6. A person has a hearing range from 20 Hz to 20 kHz. What are the typical wavelengths of sound waves in air corresponding to these two frequencies? Take the speed of sound in air as 344 ms '. 7. Two children are at opposite ends of an aluminium rod. One strikes the end of the rod with a stone. Find the ratio of times taken by the sound wave in air and in aluminium to reach the second child. 8. The frequeney of a source of sound is 100 Hz. How many times does it vibrate in a minute? 9. Does sound follow the same laws of reflection as light does? Explain. 10. When a sound is reflected from a distant object, an echo is produced, Let the distance between the reflecting surface and the source of sound production remains the same. Do you hear echo sound on a hotter day? 11. Give two practical applications of reflection of sound waves. 12. Astone is dropped from the top of a tower 500 m high into a pond of water at the base of the tower. When is the splash heard at the top? Given, g= 10 ms? and speed of sound = 340 msi. 138 Sewer, Reprint 2025-26

[Page 14]
SOUND 139 13. A sound wave travels at a speed of 339 m s–1. If its wavelength is 1.5 cm, what is the frequency of the wave? Will it be audible? 14. What is reverberation? How can it be reduced? 15. What is loudness of sound? What factors does it depend on? 16. How is ultrasound used for cleaning? 17. Explain how defects in a metal block can be detected using ultrasound. Reprint 2025-26
13. Asound wave travels at a speed of 339 m s |. If its wavelength is 1.5 ecm, what is the frequency of the wave? Will it be audible? 14. What is reverberation? How can it be reduced? 15. What is loudness of sound’? What factors does it depend on? 16. How is ultrasound used for cleaning? 17. Explain how defects in a metal block can be detected using ultrasound. Soup 139 Reprint 2025-26 :