[Page 1]
Everyday we hear sounds from various sources like humans, birds, bells, machines, vehicles, televisions, radios etc. Sound is a form of energy which pr oduces a sensation of hearing in our ears. Ther e are also other forms of energy like mechanical energy, light energy, etc. We have talked about mechanical energy in the pr evious chapters. Y ou have been taught about conservation of energy, which states that we can neither create nor destroy energy. We can just change it fr om one form to another. When you clap, a sound is produced. Can you produce sound without utilising your energy? Which form of energy did you use to produce sound? In this chapter we are going to learn how sound is produced and how it is transmitted through a medium and received by our ears. 11.1 Production of Sound Activity 11.1 • Take a tuning fork and set it vibrating by striking its prong on a rubber pad. Bring it near your ear. • Do you hear any sound? • Touch one of the prongs of the vibrating tuning fork with your finger and share your experience with your friends. • Now, suspend a table tennis ball or a small plastic ball by a thr ead from a support [T ake a big needle and a thread, put a knot at one end of the thread, and then with the help of the needle pass the thr ead thr ough the ball]. T ouch the ball gently with the pr ong of a vibrating tuning fork (Fig. 11.1). • Observe what happens and discuss with your friends. Activity 11.2 • Fill water in a beaker or a glass up to the brim. Gently touch the water surface with one of the prongs of the vibrating tuning fork, as shown in Fig. 1 1.2. • Next dip the pr ongs of the vibrating tuning fork in water, as shown in Fig. 11.3. • Observe what happens in both the cases. • Discuss with your friends why this happens. Fig. 11.1: Vibrating tuning fork just touching the suspended table tennis ball. Fig. 11.2: One of the prongs of the vibrating tuning fork touching the water surface. 11 SSS SSOUND OUNDOUND OUNDOUND C hapter

[Page 2]
SCIENCE128 the vibrating object to the ear . A particle of the medium in contact with the vibrating object is first displaced from its equilibrium position. It then exerts a force on the adjacent particle. As a r esult of which the adjacent particle gets displaced fr om its position of rest. After displacing the adjacent particle the first particle comes back to its original position. This pr ocess continues in the medium till the sound reaches your ear. The disturbance created by a source of sound in the medium travels through the medium and not the particles of the medium. A wave is a disturbance that moves through a medium when the particles of the medium set neighbouring particles into motion. They in turn produce similar motion in others. The particles of the medium do not move forwar d themselves, but the disturbance is carried forward. This is what happens during pr opagation of sound in a medium, hence sound can be visualised as a wave. Sound waves are characterised by the motion of particles in the medium and ar e called mechanical waves. Air is the most common medium through which sound travels. When a vibrating object moves forward, it pushes and compresses the air in front of it creating a region of high pressure. This region is called a compression (C), as shown in Fig. 11.4. This compression starts to move away from the vibrating object. When the vibrating object moves backwards, it cr eates a r egion of low pr essure called rarefaction (R), as shown in Fig. 11.4. As the object moves back and forth rapidly, a series of compressions and rarefactions is created in the air . These make the sound wave that Fig. 11.3: Both the prongs of the vibrating tuning fork dipped in water From the above activities what do you conclude? Can you pr oduce sound without a vibrating object? In the above activities we have produced sound by striking the tuning fork. W e can also produce sound by plucking, scratching, rubbing, blowing or shaking different objects. As per the above activities what do we do to the objects? We set the objects vibrating and produce sound. V ibration means a kind of rapid to and fr o motion of an object. The sound of the human voice is pr oduced due to vibrations in the vocal cords. When a bird flaps its wings, do you hear any sound? Think how the buzzing sound accompanying a bee is produced. A stretched rubber band when plucked vibrates and produces sound. If you have never done this, then do it and observe the vibration of the stretched rubber band. Activity 11.3 • Make a list of different types of musical instruments and discuss with your friends which part of the instrument vibrates to produce sound. 11.2Propagation of Sound Sound is produced by vibrating objects. The matter or substance thr ough which sound is transmitted is called a medium. It can be solid, liquid or gas. Sound moves thr ough a medium from the point of generation to the listener. When an object vibrates, it sets the particles of the medium around it vibrating. The particles do not travel all the way from Fig. 11.4: A vibrating object creating a series of compressions (C) and rarefactions (R) in the medium.

[Page 3]
SOUND 129 propagates through the medium. Compression is the r egion of high pr essure and rarefaction is the region of low pressure. Pressure is related to the number of particles of a medium in a given volume. More density of the particles in the medium gives mor e pressure and vice versa. Thus, pr opagation of sound can be visualised as propagation of density variations or pr essure variations in the medium. uestion 1. How does the sound produced by a vibrating object in a medium reach your ear? 2. Explain how sound is produced by your school bell. 3. Why are sound waves called mechanical waves? 4. Suppose you and your friend are on the moon. Will you be able to hear any sound pr oduced by your friend? 11.2.1SOUND WAVES ARE LONGITUDINAL WAVES Activity 11.4 • Take a slinky. Ask your friend to hold one end. You hold the other end. Now str etch the slinky as shown in Fig. 11.5(a). Then give it a sharp push towards your friend. • What do you notice? If you move your hand pushing and pulling the slinky alternatively, what will you observe? • If you mark a dot on the slinky, you will observe that the dot on the slinky will move back and forth parallel to the direction of the propagation of the disturbance. The regions where the coils become closer are called compressions (C) and the regions where the coils are further apart are called rarefactions (R). As we already know, sound propagates in the medium as a series of compressions and rarefactions. Now, we can compare the propagation of disturbance in a slinky with the sound propagation in the medium. These waves are called longitudinal waves. In these waves the individual particles of the medium move in a direction parallel to the direction of propagation of the disturbance. The particles do not move from one place to another but they simply oscillate back and forth about their position of rest. This is exactly how a sound wave propagates, hence sound waves are longitudinal waves. There is also another type of wave, called a transverse wave. In a transverse wave particles do not oscillate along the direction of wave propagation but oscillate up and down about their mean position as the wave travels. Thus, a transverse wave is the one in which the individual particles of the medium move about their mean positions in a direction perpendicular to the direction of wave propagation. When we drop a pebble in a pond, the waves you see on the water surface is an example of transverse wave. Light is a transverse wave but for light, the oscillations are not of the medium particles or their pressure or density— it is not a mechanical wave. Y ou will come to know mor e about transverse waves in higher classes. 11.2.2CHARACTERISTICS OF A SOUND WAVE We can describe a sound wave by its • frequency • amplitude and • speed. Q A sound wave in graphic form is shown in Fig. 11.6(c), which represents how density and pressure change when the sound wave moves in the medium. The density as well as the pressure of the medium at a given time varies with distance, above and below the average value of density and pressure. Fig. 11.6(a) and (b) (a) Fig. 11.5: Longitudinal wave in a slinky.

[Page 4]
SCIENCE130 Heinrich Rudolph Hertz was born on 22 February 1857 in Hamburg, Germany and educated at the University of Berlin. He confirmed J.C. Maxwell’s electromagnetic theory by his experiments. He laid the foundation for future development of radio, telephone, telegraph and even television. He also discovered the photoelectric effect which was later explained by Albert Einstein. The SI unit of frequency was named as hertz in his honour. Fig. 11.6(b) represent the density and pressure variations, respectively, as a sound wave propagates in the medium. Compressions are the regions where particles are crowded together and represented by the upper portion of the curve in Fig. 11.6(c). The peak represents the region of maximum compression. Thus, compressions are regions where density as well as pressure is high. Rarefactions are the regions of low pressure where particles are spread apart and are represented by the valley, that is, the lower portion of the curve in Fig. 11.6(c). A peak is called the crest and a valley is called the trough of a wave. The distance between two consecutive compressions (C) or two consecutive rarefactions (R) is called the wavelength, as shown in Fig. 11.6(c), The wavelength is usually represented by λ (Greek letter lambda). Its SI unit is metre (m). H. R. Hertz Fig. 11.6: Sound propagates as density or pressure variations as shown in (a) and (b), (c) represents graphically the density and pressure variations. Frequency tells us how frequently an event occurs. Suppose you are beating a drum. How many times you are beating the drum in unit time is called the frequency of your beating the drum. We know that when sound is propagated through a medium, the