[Page 1]
Everyday we hear sounds from various sources like humans, birds, bells, machines, vehicles, televisions, radios etc. Sound is a form of energy which pr oduces a sensation of hearing in our ears. Ther e are also other forms of energy like mechanical energy, light energy, etc. We have talked about mechanical energy in the pr evious chapters. Y ou have been taught about conservation of energy, which states that we can neither create nor destroy energy. We can just change it fr om one form to another. When you clap, a sound is produced. Can you produce sound without utilising your energy? Which form of energy did you use to produce sound? In this chapter we are going to learn how sound is produced and how it is transmitted through a medium and received by our ears. 11.1 Production of Sound Activity _____________ 11.1 • Take a tuning fork and set it vibrating by striking its prong on a rubber pad. Bring it near your ear. • Do you hear any sound? • Touch one of the prongs of the vibrating tuning fork with your finger and share your experience with your friends. • Now, suspend a table tennis ball or a small plastic ball by a thr ead from a support [T ake a big needle and a thread, put a knot at one end of the thread, and then with the help of the needle pass the thr ead thr ough the ball]. T ouch the ball gently with the pr ong of a vibrating tuning fork (Fig. 11.1). • Observe what happens and discuss with your friends. Activity _____________ 11.2 • Fill water in a beaker or a glass up to the brim. Gently touch the water surface with one of the prongs of the vibrating tuning fork, as shown in Fig. 1 1.2. • Next dip the pr ongs of the vibrating tuning fork in water, as shown in Fig. 11.3. • Observe what happens in both the cases. • Discuss with your friends why this happens. Fig. 11.1: Vibrating tuning fork just touching the suspended table tennis ball. Fig. 11.2: One of the prongs of the vibrating tuning fork touching the water surface. 11 SSS SSOUND OUNDOUND OUNDOUND C hapter Reprint 2025-26
er = F C : hapter A1 sa Everyday we hear sounds from various sources like humans, birds, bells, machines. H vehicles, televisions, radios etc. Sound is a a form of energy which produces a sensation é Thread of hearing in our ears. There are also other é forms of energy like mechanical energy, light os energy, etc. We have talked about mechanical f energy in the previous chapters. You have é : ‘Table tennis ball been taught about conservation of energy. ny which states that we can neither create nor ied ry destroy energy. We can just change it from — one form to another. When you clap, a sound Vibrating tuning lork is produced. Can you produce sound without utilising your energy? Which form of energy did you use to produce sound? In this Fig. 11.1: Vibrating tuning fork just touching the chapter we are going to learn how sound is suspended table tennis ball. produced and how it is transmitted through a medium and received by our ears. * Activity 11.2 11.1 Production of Sound . Fill water in a beaker or a glass up to the brim, Gently touch the water surface Activity 11.1 with one of the prongs of the vibrating TT tuning fork, as shown in Fig, 11.2. ¢ ‘Take a tuning fork and set it vibrating « Next dip the prongs of the vibrating by stnking its prong on a rubber pad. tuning fork in water, as shown in Fig. Bring it near your ear. 11.3, . Do you hear any sound? . Observe what happens in both the . ‘Touch one of the prongs of the vibrating cases. tuning fork with your finger and share . Discuss with your friends why this your experience with your friends. happens. . Now, suspend a table tennis hall or a ; Vibrating tummng fork small plastic ball by a thread from a . support (Take a big needle and a Seer Gane thread, put a knot at one end of the eee ' thread, and then with the help of the H ! Ges: needle pass the thread through the H ? Water ball]. Touch the ball gently with the 4 : prong of a vibrating tuning 4 : fork (Fig. 11.1). H H . Observe what happens and discuss Men ae? with your friends. Fig. 11.2: One of the prongs of the vibrating tuning fork touching the water surface. Reprint 2025-26

[Page 2]
SCIENCE128 the vibrating object to the ear . A particle of the medium in contact with the vibrating object is first displaced from its equilibrium position. It then exerts a force on the adjacent particle. As a r esult of which the adjacent particle gets displaced fr om its position of rest. After displacing the adjacent particle the first particle comes back to its original position. This pr ocess continues in the medium till the sound reaches your ear. The disturbance created by a source of sound in the medium travels through the medium and not the particles of the medium. A wave is a disturbance that moves through a medium when the particles of the medium set neighbouring particles into motion. They in turn produce similar motion in others. The particles of the medium do not move forwar d themselves, but the disturbance is carried forward. This is what happens during pr opagation of sound in a medium, hence sound can be visualised as a wave. Sound waves are characterised by the motion of particles in the medium and ar e called mechanical waves. Air is the most common medium through which sound travels. When a vibrating object moves forward, it pushes and compresses the air in front of it creating a region of high pressure. This region is called a compression (C), as shown in Fig. 11.4. This compression starts to move away from the vibrating object. When the vibrating object moves backwards, it cr eates a r egion of low pr essure called rarefaction (R), as shown in Fig. 11.4. As the object moves back and forth rapidly, a series of compressions and rarefactions is created in the air . These make the sound wave that Fig. 11.3: Both the prongs of the vibrating tuning fork dipped in water From the above activities what do you conclude? Can you pr oduce sound without a vibrating object? In the above activities we have produced sound by striking the tuning fork. W e can also produce sound by plucking, scratching, rubbing, blowing or shaking different objects. As per the above activities what do we do to the objects? We set the objects vibrating and produce sound. V ibration means a kind of rapid to and fr o motion of an object. The sound of the human voice is pr oduced due to vibrations in the vocal cords. When a bird flaps its wings, do you hear any sound? Think how the buzzing sound accompanying a bee is produced. A stretched rubber band when plucked vibrates and produces sound. If you have never done this, then do it and observe the vibration of the stretched rubber band. Activity _____________ 11.3 • Make a list of different types of musical instruments and discuss with your friends which part of the instrument vibrates to produce sound. 11.2Propagation of Sound Sound is produced by vibrating objects. The matter or substance thr ough which sound is transmitted is called a medium. It can be solid, liquid or gas. Sound moves thr ough a medium from the point of generation to the listener. When an object vibrates, it sets the particles of the medium around it vibrating. The particles do not travel all the way from Fig. 11.4: A vibrating object creating a series of compressions (C) and rarefactions (R) in the medium. Reprint 2025-26
| the vibrating object to the ear. A particle of aN : the medium in contact with the vibrating } Vibrating tuning tark - ° it object is first displaced from its equilibrium _ 4, position. It then exerts a force on the adjacent : | i ae Glass particle. As a result of which the adjacent 4 : —— particle gets displaced from its position of i i Water rest. After displacing the adjacent particle the H : first particle comes back to its original i : position. This process continues in the woe medium till the sound reaches your ear. The . disturbance created by a source of sound in Fig. 11.3: Both the prongs of the vibrating tanning the medium travels through the medium and fork dipped in water not the particles of the medium. A wave is a disturbance that moves From the above activities what do you through a medium when the particles of the conclude? Can you produce sound without medium set neighbouring particles into a vibrating object? motion. They in turn produce similar motion In the above activities we have produced — in others. The particles of the medium do not sound by striking the tuning fork. We can move forward themselves, but the also produce sound by plucking, scratching, — disturbance is carried forward. This is what rubbing, blowing or shaking different objects. | happens during propagation of sound in a As per the above activities what do we do to medium, hence sound can be visualised as a the objects? We set the objects vibrating and wave. Sound waves are characterised by the produce sound. Vibration means a kind of | Motion of particles in the medium and are rapid to and fro motion of an object. The called mechanical waves. sound of the human voice is produced due Air is the most common medium through to vibrations in the vocal cords. When a bird — Which sound travels. When a vibrating object flaps its wings. do you hear any sound? Think — Moves forward, it pushes and compresses the how the buzzing sound accompanying a bee i? in front of it creating a region of high is produced. A stretched rubber band when — Pressure. This region is called a compression plucked vibrates and produces sound. If you (C), as shown in F ig. 11.4. This compression have never done this, then do it and observe starts to move away from the vibrating object. the vibration of the stretched rubber band. When the vibrating object moves backwards, it creates a region of low pressure called Activity 11 3 rarefaction (R), as shown in Fig. 11.4. As the TT object moves back and forth rapidly, a series ¢ Make a list of different types of of compressions and rarefactions is created in musical instruments and discuss the air. These make the sound wave that with your friends which part of the instrument vibrates to produce Pe AP WSSSSEE Si: bbb il iiuuuummesmmmcs: rr: 11.2 Propagation of Sound Se! SHES Sound is produced by vibrating objects. The seer R nn matter or substance through which sound is transmitted is called a medium. It can be solid. liquid or gas. Sound moves through a medium from the point of generation to the listener. When an object vibrates, it sets the Pig. 11.42 A vibrating object creating a series of particles of the medium around it vibrating. : compressions (C] and rarefactions (RJ int The particles do not travel all the way from the mediutn. 128 Scene : Reprint 2025-26