[Page 9]
SOUND 135 2. Stethoscope is a medical instrument used for listening to sounds produced within the body, mainly in the heart or lungs. In stethoscopes the sound of the patient’s heartbeat reaches the doctor’s ears by multiple reflection of sound, as shown in Fig.11.11. Fig. 11.12: Curved ceiling of a conference hall. Fig. 11.13: Sound board used in a big hall. uestion 1. Why are the ceilings of concert halls curved? 11.4Range of Hearing The audible range of sound for human beings extends from about 20 Hz to 20000 Hz (one Hz = one cycle/s). Children under the age of five and some animals, such as dogs can hear up to 25 kHz (1 kHz = 1000 Hz). As people grow older their ears become less sensitive to higher frequencies. Sounds of frequencies below 20 Hz are called infrasonic sound or infrasound. If we could hear infrasound we would hear the vibrations of a pendulum just as we hear the vibrations of the wings of a bee. Rhinoceroses communicate using infrasound of frequency as low as 5 Hz. Whales and elephants produce sound in the infrasound range. It is observed that some animals get disturbed before earthquakes. Earthquakes produce low-frequency infrasound before the main shock waves begin which possibly alert the animals. Frequencies higher than 20 kHz are called ultrasonic sound or ultrasound. Ultrasound is produced by animals such as dolphins, bats and porpoises. Moths of certain families have very sensitive hearing equipment. These moths can hear the high frequency Q Fig.11.11: Stethoscope 3. Generally the ceilings of concert halls, conference halls and cinema halls are curved so that sound after reflection reaches all corners of the hall, as shown in Fig 1 1.12. Sometimes a curved soundboard may be placed behind the stage so that the sound, after reflecting from the sound board, spreads evenly across the width of the hall (Fig 11.13). In these instruments, a tube followed by a conical opening reflects sound successively to guide most of the sound waves from the source in the forward direction towards the audience.

[Page 10]
SCIENCE136 squeaks of the bat and know when a bat is flying nearby, and are able to escape capture. Rats also play games by producing ultrasound. Hearing Aid: People with hearing loss may need a hearing aid. A hearing aid is an electronic, battery operated device. The hearing aid receives sound through a microphone. The microphone converts the sound waves to electrical signals. These electrical signals are amplified by an amplifier. The amplified electrical signals are given to a speaker of the hearing aid. The speaker converts the amplified electrical signal to sound and sends to the ear for clear hearing. in construction of big structures like buildings, bridges, machines and also scientific equipment. The cracks or holes inside the metal blocks, which are invisible from outside reduces the strength of the structure. Ultrasonic waves are allowed to pass through the metal block and detectors are used to detect the transmitted waves. If there is even a small defect, the ultrasound gets reflected back indicating the presence of the flaw or defect, as shown in Fig. 11.14. Q Metallic components are generally used uestions 1. What is the audible range of the average human ear? 2. What is the range of frequencies associated with (a) Infrasound? (b) Ultrasound? 11.5Applications of Ultrasound Ultrasounds are high frequency waves. Ultrasounds are able to travel along well- defined paths even in the presence of obstacles. Ultrasounds are used extensively in industries and for medical purposes. • Ultrasound is generally used to clean parts located in hard-to-reach places, for example, spiral tube, odd shaped parts, electronic components, etc. Objects to be cleaned are placed in a cleaning solution and ultrasonic waves are sent into the solution. Due to the high frequency, the particles of dust, grease and dirt get detached and drop out. The objects thus get thoroughly cleaned. • Ultrasounds can be used to detect cracks and flaws in metal blocks. Fig 11.14: Ultrasound is reflected back from the defective locations inside a metal block. Ordinary sound of longer wavelengths cannot be used for such purpose as it will bend around the corners of the defective location and enter the detector. • Ultrasonic waves are made to reflect from various parts of the heart and form the image of the heart. This tech- nique is called ‘echocardiography’. • Ultrasound scanner is an instrument which uses ultrasonic waves for getting images of internal organs of the human body. A doctor may image the patient’s organs, such as the liver, gall bladder, uterus, kidney, etc. It helps the doctor to detect abnormalities, such as stones in the gall bladder and kidney or tumours in different organs. In this technique the ultrasonic waves travel through the tissues of the body and get reflected from a region where there is a change of tissue density.

[Page 11]
SCIENCE136 squeaks of the bat and know when a bat is flying nearby, and are able to escape capture. Rats also play games by producing ultrasound. Hearing Aid: People with hearing loss may need a hearing aid. A hearing aid is an electronic, battery operated device. The hearing aid receives sound through a microphone. The microphone converts the sound waves to electrical signals. These electrical signals are amplified by an amplifier. The amplified electrical signals are given to a speaker of the hearing aid. The speaker converts the amplified electrical signal to sound and sends to the ear for clear hearing. in construction of big structures like buildings, bridges, machines and also scientific equipment. The cracks or holes inside the metal blocks, which are invisible from outside reduces the strength of the structure. Ultrasonic waves are allowed to pass through the metal block and detectors are used to detect the transmitted waves. If there is even a small defect, the ultrasound gets reflected back indicating the presence of the flaw or defect, as shown in Fig. 11.14. Q Metallic components are generally used uestions 1. What is the audible range of the average human ear? 2. What is the range of frequencies associated with (a) Infrasound? (b) Ultrasound? 11.5Applications of Ultrasound Ultrasounds are high frequency waves. Ultrasounds are able to travel along well- defined paths even in the presence of obstacles. Ultrasounds are used extensively in industries and for medical purposes. • Ultrasound is generally used to clean parts located in hard-to-reach places, for example, spiral tube, odd shaped parts, electronic components, etc. Objects to be cleaned are placed in a cleaning solution and ultrasonic waves are sent into the solution. Due to the high frequency, the particles of dust, grease and dirt get detached and drop out. The objects thus get thoroughly cleaned. • Ultrasounds can be used to detect cracks and flaws in metal blocks. Fig 11.14: Ultrasound is reflected back from the defective locations inside a metal block. Ordinary sound of longer wavelengths cannot be used for such purpose as it will bend around the corners of the defective location and enter the detector. • Ultrasonic waves are made to reflect from various parts of the heart and form the image of the heart. This tech- nique is called ‘echocardiography’. • Ultrasound scanner is an instrument which uses ultrasonic waves for getting images of internal organs of the human body. A doctor may image the patient’s organs, such as the liver, gall bladder, uterus, kidney, etc. It helps the doctor to detect abnormalities, such as stones in the gall bladder and kidney or tumours in different organs. In this technique the ultrasonic waves travel through the tissues of the body and get reflected from a region where there is a change of tissue density.

[Page 12]
SOUND 137 What you have learnt • Sound is produced due to vibration of different objects. • Sound travels as a longitudinal wave through a material medium. • Sound travels as successive compressions and rarefactions in the medium. • In sound propagation, it is the energy of the sound that travels and not the particles of the medium. • The change in density from one maximum value to the minimum value and again to the maximum value makes one complete oscillation. • The distance between two consecutive compressions or two consecutive rarefactions is called the wavelength, λ. • The time taken by the wave for one complete oscillation of the density or pressure of the medium is called the time period, T. • The number of complete oscillations per unit time is called the frequency (ν ), 1=v .T • The speed v, frequency ν, and wavelength λ, of sound are related by the equation, v = λν. • The speed of sound depends primarily on the nature and the temperature of the transmitting medium. • The law of reflection of sound states that the directions in which the sound is incident and reflected make equal angles with the normal to the reflecting surface at the point of incidence and the three lie in the same plane. • For hearing a distinct sound, the time interval between the original sound and the reflected one must be at least 0.1 s. • The persistence of sound in an auditorium is the result of repeated reflections of sound and is called reverberation. These waves are then converted into electrical signals that are used to generate images of the organ. These images are then displayed on a monitor or printed on a film. This technique is called ‘ultrasonography’. Ultrasonography is also used for examination of the foetus during pregnancy to detect congenial defects and growth abnormalities. • Ultrasound may be employed to break small ‘stones’ formed in the kidneys into fine grains. These grains later get flushed out with urine.

[Page 13]
SCIENCE138 • Loudness is a physiological response of the ear to the intensity of sound. • The amount of sound energy passing each second through unit area is called the intensity of sound. • The audible range of hearing for average human beings is in the frequency range of 20 Hz – 20 kHz. • Sound waves with frequencies below the audible range are termed “infrasonic” and those above the audible range are termed “ultrasonic”. • Ultrasound has many medical and industrial applications. Exercises 1. What is sound and how is it produced? 2. Describe with the help of a diagram, how compressions and rarefactions are produced in air near a source of sound. 3. Why is sound wave called a longitudinal wave? 4. Which characteristic of the sound helps you to identify your friend by his voice while sitting with others in a dark room? 5. Flash and thunder are produced simultaneously. But thunder is heard a few seconds after the flash is seen, why? 6. A person has a hearing range from 20 Hz to 20 kHz. What are the typical wavelengths of sound waves in air corresponding to these two frequencies? Take the speed of sound in air as 344 m s –1. 7. Two children are at opposite ends of an aluminium rod. One strikes the end of the rod with a stone. Find the ratio of times taken by the sound wave in air and in aluminium to reach the second child. 8. The frequency of a source of sound is 100 Hz. How many times does it vibrate in a minute? 9. Does sound follow the same laws of reflection as light does? Explain. 10. When a sound is reflected from a distant object, an echo is produced. Let the distance between the reflecting surface and the source of sound production remains the same. Do you hear echo sound on a hotter day? 11. Give two practical applications of reflection of sound waves. 12. A stone is dropped from the top of a tower 500 m high into a pond of water at the base of the tower . When is the splash heard at the top? Given, g = 10 m s –2 and speed of sound = 340 m s –1. • Sound properties such as pitch, loudness and quality are determined by the corresponding wave properties.