[Page 11]
SCIENCE136 squeaks of the bat and know when a bat is flying nearby, and are able to escape capture. Rats also play games by producing ultrasound. Hearing Aid: People with hearing loss may need a hearing aid. A hearing aid is an electronic, battery operated device. The hearing aid receives sound through a microphone. The microphone converts the sound waves to electrical signals. These electrical signals are amplified by an amplifier. The amplified electrical signals are given to a speaker of the hearing aid. The speaker converts the amplified electrical signal to sound and sends to the ear for clear hearing. in construction of big structures like buildings, bridges, machines and also scientific equipment. The cracks or holes inside the metal blocks, which are invisible from outside reduces the strength of the structure. Ultrasonic waves are allowed to pass through the metal block and detectors are used to detect the transmitted waves. If there is even a small defect, the ultrasound gets reflected back indicating the presence of the flaw or defect, as shown in Fig. 11.14. Q Metallic components are generally used uestions 1. What is the audible range of the average human ear? 2. What is the range of frequencies associated with (a) Infrasound? (b) Ultrasound? 11.5Applications of Ultrasound Ultrasounds are high frequency waves. Ultrasounds are able to travel along well- defined paths even in the presence of obstacles. Ultrasounds are used extensively in industries and for medical purposes. • Ultrasound is generally used to clean parts located in hard-to-reach places, for example, spiral tube, odd shaped parts, electronic components, etc. Objects to be cleaned are placed in a cleaning solution and ultrasonic waves are sent into the solution. Due to the high frequency, the particles of dust, grease and dirt get detached and drop out. The objects thus get thoroughly cleaned. • Ultrasounds can be used to detect cracks and flaws in metal blocks. Fig 11.14: Ultrasound is reflected back from the defective locations inside a metal block. Ordinary sound of longer wavelengths cannot be used for such purpose as it will bend around the corners of the defective location and enter the detector. • Ultrasonic waves are made to reflect from various parts of the heart and form the image of the heart. This tech- nique is called ‘echocardiography’. • Ultrasound scanner is an instrument which uses ultrasonic waves for getting images of internal organs of the human body. A doctor may image the patient’s organs, such as the liver, gall bladder, uterus, kidney, etc. It helps the doctor to detect abnormalities, such as stones in the gall bladder and kidney or tumours in different organs. In this technique the ultrasonic waves travel through the tissues of the body and get reflected from a region where there is a change of tissue density. Reprint 2025-26
squeaks of the bat and know when a bat in construction of big structures like is flying nearby, and are able to escape buildings, bridges, machines and also capture. Rats also play games by scientific equipment. The cracks or producing ultrasound. holes inside the metal blocks, which are invisible from outside reduces the strength of the structure. Ultrasonic Hearing Aid: People with hearing loss may waves are allowed to pass through the need a hearing aid. A hearing aid is an metal block and detectors are used to electronic, battery operated device. The detect the transmitted waves. If there hearing aid receives sound through a is even a small defect, the ultrasound microphone. The microphone converts the gets reflected back indicating the sound waves to electrical signals. These presence of the flaw or defect, as shown electrical signals are amplified by an in Fig. 11.14. amplifier. The amplified electrical signals 7 are given to a speaker of the hearing aid. Detect or Maw The speaker converts the amplified 25>)—|"T—™—F"™FVS>P@*@€XTV]+!:-—-—-—V—M—MNCTcCLVV electrical signal to sound and sends to the (J ear for clear hearing. 2 ee fe £ W apoctignare E a () nestions i | | 1. What is the audible range of the LP average haan car? Metal Block \ 2. Whatis the range of Irequcncics Pig 11.14: Ultrasound is reflected back from the AY assoctated With defective locations inside a metal block. fa) Intrasound? {bh} Ulwasound? Ordinary sound of longer wavelengths cannot be used for such purpose as it will 11.5 Applications of Ultrasound bend around the corners of the defective location and enter the detector. Ultrasounds are high frequency waves. e = Ultrasonic waves are made to reflect Ultrasounds are able to travel along well- from various parts of the heart and defined paths even in the presence of form the image of the heart. This tech- obstacles. Ultrasounds are used extensively nique is called ‘echocardiography’. in industries and for medical purposes. e = Ultrasound scanner is an instrument e = Ultrasound is generally used to clean which uses ultrasonic waves for parts located in hard-to-reach places, setting images of internal organs of the for example, spiral tube, odd shaped Bt Be imanes . Bans human body. A doctor may image the parts, electronic components, etc. : ° Objects to be cleaned are placed ina patient’s organs, such as the liver, gall cleaning solution and ultrasonic waves bladder, uterus. kidney, ete. It helps are sent into the solution. Due to the doctor to detect abnormalities, the high frequency. the particles of such as stones in the gall bladder and dust. grease and dirt get detached and kidney or tumours in different organs. drop “out. The objects thus get In this technique the ultrasonic waves thoroughly cleaned. travel through the tissues of the body e «Ultrasounds can be used to detect and get reflected from a region where cracks and flaws in metal blocks. there is a change of Ussue density. 136 Science. Metallic components are generally used Reprint 2025-26

[Page 12]
SOUND 137 What you have learnt • Sound is produced due to vibration of different objects. • Sound travels as a longitudinal wave through a material medium. • Sound travels as successive compressions and rarefactions in the medium. • In sound propagation, it is the energy of the sound that travels and not the particles of the medium. • The change in density from one maximum value to the minimum value and again to the maximum value makes one complete oscillation. • The distance between two consecutive compressions or two consecutive rarefactions is called the wavelength, λ. • The time taken by the wave for one complete oscillation of the density or pressure of the medium is called the time period, T. • The number of complete oscillations per unit time is called the frequency (ν ), 1=v .T • The speed v, frequency ν, and wavelength λ, of sound are related by the equation, v = λν. • The speed of sound depends primarily on the nature and the temperature of the transmitting medium. • The law of reflection of sound states that the directions in which the sound is incident and reflected make equal angles with the normal to the reflecting surface at the point of incidence and the three lie in the same plane. • For hearing a distinct sound, the time interval between the original sound and the reflected one must be at least 0.1 s. • The persistence of sound in an auditorium is the result of repeated reflections of sound and is called reverberation. These waves are then converted into electrical signals that are used to generate images of the organ. These images are then displayed on a monitor or printed on a film. This technique is called ‘ultrasonography’. Ultrasonography is also used for examination of the foetus during pregnancy to detect congenial defects and growth abnormalities. • Ultrasound may be employed to break small ‘stones’ formed in the kidneys into fine grains. These grains later get flushed out with urine. Reprint 2025-26
These waves are then converted into examination of the foetus during electrical signals that are used to pregnancy to detect congenial detects generate images of the organ. These and growth abnormalities. images are then displayed on a monitor e = Ultrasound may be employed to break or printed on a film. This technique small ‘stones’ formed in the kidneys is called ‘ultrasonography’. into fine grains. These grains later get Ultrasonography is also used for flushed out with urine. Ld) What SL BR Nii you have ‘ ae vA learnt — ° Sound is produced due to vibration of different objects. ° Sound travels as a longitudinal wave through a material medium. ° Sound travels as successive compressions and rarefactions in the medium. ° In sound propagation, it is the energy of the sound that travels and not the particles of the medium. ° The change in density from one maximum value to the minimum value and again to the maximum value makes one complete oscillation. ° The distance between two consecutive compressions or two consecutive rarefactions is called the wavelength, 2. ° The time taken by the wave for one complete oscillation of the density or pressure of the medium is called the time period, T. ° The number of complete oscillations per unit time is called . 1 the frequency (¥), ver ° The speed v, frequency v, and wavelength 7%, of sound are related by the equation, v = dv. ° The speed of sound depends primarily on the nature and the temperature of the transmitting medium. ° The law of reflection of sound states that the directions in which the sound is incident and reflected make equal angles with the normal to the reflecting surface at the point of incidence and the three lie in the same plane. ° For hearing a distinet sound, the time interval between the original sound and the reflected one must be at least 0.1 s. ° The persistence of sound in an auditorium is the result of repeated reflections of sound and is called reverberation. Souxp 137 Reprint 2025-26