[Page 5]
SOUND 131 131131131131 How the brain interprets the frequency of an emitted sound is called its pitch. The faster the vibration of the source, the higher is the frequency and the higher is the pitch, as shown in Fig. 11.7. Thus, a high pitch sound corresponds to more number of compressions and rarefactions passing a fixed point per unit time. Objects of different sizes and conditions vibrate at different frequencies to produce sounds of different pitch. The magnitude of the maximum disturbance in the medium on either side of the mean value is called the amplitude of the wave. It is usually represented by the letter A, as shown in Fig. 11.6(c). For sound its unit will be that of density or pressure. The loudness or softness of a sound is determined basically by its amplitude. The amplitude of the sound wave depends upon the force with which an object is made to vibrate. If we strike a table lightly, we hear a soft sound because we produce a sound wave density of the medium oscillates between a maximum value and a minimum value. The change in density from the maximum value to the minimum value, then again to the maximum value, makes one complete oscillation. The number of such oscillations per unit time is the frequency of the sound wave. If we can count the number of the compressions or rarefactions that cross us per unit time, we will get the frequency of the sound wave. It is usually represented by n (G reek letter , nu). I ts SI unit is hertz (symbol, Hz). The time taken by two consecutive compressions or rarefactions to cross a fixed point is called the time period of the wave. In other words, we can say that the time taken for one complete oscillation is called the time period of the sound wave. It is represented by the symbol T. Its SI unit is second (s). Frequency and time period are related as follows: A violin and a flute may both be played at the same time in an orchestra. Both sounds travel through the same medium, that is, air and arrive at our ear at the same time. Both sounds travel at the same speed irrespective of the source. But the sounds we receive are different. This is due to the different characteristics associated with the sound. Pitch is one of the characteristics. = 1v T Fig. 11.7: Fig. 11.7:Fig. 11.7: Fig. 11.7:Fig. 11.7: Low pitch sound has low frequency and high pitch of sound has high frequency. Fig. 11.8:Fig. 11.8:Fig. 11.8:Fig. 11.8:Fig. 11.8: Soft sound has small amplitude and louder sound has large amplitude.

[Page 6]
SCIENCE132 Q Q uestions 1. Which wave property determines (a) loudness, (b) pitch? 2. Guess which sound has a higher pitch: guitar or car horn? The speed of sound is defined as the distance which a point on a wave, such as a compression or a rarefaction, travels per unit time. We know, speed, v = distance / time = λ T Example 11.1 A sound wave has a frequency of 2 kHz and wave length 35 cm. How long will it take to travel 1.5 km? Solution: Given, Frequency, ν = 2 kHz = 2000 Hz Wavelength, λ = 35 cm = 0.35 m We know that speed, v of the wave = wavelength × frequency v = λ ν = 0.35 m 2000 Hz = 700 m/s The time taken by the wave to travel a distance, d of 1.5 km is Thus sound will take 2.1 s to travel a distance of 1.5 km. uestions 1. What are wavelength, frequency, time period and amplitude of a sound wave? 2. How are the wavelength and frequency of a sound wave related to its speed? 3. Calculate the wavelength of a sound wave whose frequency is 220 Hz and speed is 440 m/s in a given medium. 4. A person is listening to a tone of 500 Hz sitting at a distance of 450 m from the source of the sound. What is the time interval between successive compressions from the source? The amount of sound energy passing each second through unit area is called the intensity of sound. W e sometimes use the ter ms “loudness” and “intensity” interchangeably, but they are not the same. Loudness is a measure of the response of the ear to the sound. Even when two sounds are of equal intensity, we may hear one as louder than the other simply because our ear detects it better. of less energy (amplitude). If we hit the table hard we hear a louder sound. Can you tell why? A sound wave spreads out from its source. As it moves away from the source its amplitude as well as its loudness decreases. Louder sound can travel a larger distance as it is associated with higher energy. Fig. 11.8 shows the wave shapes of a loud and a soft sound of the same frequency. The quality or timber of sound is that characteristic which enables us to distinguish one sound from another having the same pitch and loudness. The sound which is more pleasant is said to be of a rich quality. A sound of single frequency is called a tone. The sound which is produced due to a mixture of several frequencies is called a note and is pleasant to listen to. Noise is unpleasant to the ear! Music is pleasant to hear and is of rich quality. Here λ is the wavelength of the sound wave. It is the distance travelled by the sound wave in one time period (T) of the wave. Thus, v = λ ν or v = λ ν That is, speed = wavelength × frequency. The speed of sound remains almost the same for all frequencies in a given medium under the same physical conditions.

[Page 7]
SOUND 133 uestion 1. Distinguish between loudness and intensity of sound. uestion 1. In which of the three media, air, water or iron, does sound travel the fastest at a particular temperature? 11.3 Reflection of Sound Sound bounces off a solid or a liquid like a rubber ball bounces off a wall. Like light, sound gets reflected at the surface of a solid or liquid and follows the same laws of reflection as you have studied in earlier classes. The directions in which the sound is incident and is reflected make equal angles with the normal to the reflecting surface at the point of incidence, and the three are in the same plane. An obstacle of large size which may be polished or rough is needed for the reflection of sound waves. Activity 11.5 • Take two identical pipes, as shown in Fig. 11.9. Y ou can make the pipes using chart paper . The length of the pipes should be sufficiently long as shown. • Arrange them on a table near a wall. • Keep a clock near the open end of one of the pipes and try to hear the sound of the clock through the other pipe. • Adjust the position of the pipes so that you can best hear the sound of the clock. • Now, measure the angles of incidence and reflection and see the relationship between the angles. • Lift the pipe on the right vertically to a small height and observe what happens. (In place of a clock, a mobile phone on vibrating mode may also be used.) QQ 11.2.3SPEED OF SOUND IN DIFFERENT MEDIA Sound propagates through a medium at a finite speed. The sound of a thunder is heard a little later than the flash of light is seen. So, we can make out that sound travels with a speed which is much less than the speed of light. The speed of sound depends on the properties of the medium through which it travels. You will learn about this dependence in higher classes. The speed of sound in a medium depends on temperature of the medium. The speed of sound decreases when we go from solid to gaseous state. In any medium as we increase the temperature, the speed of sound increases. For example, the speed of sound in air is 331 m s–1 at 0 ºC and 344 m s–1 at 22 ºC. The speeds of sound at a particular temperature in various media are listed in Table 11.1. You need not memorise the values. Table 11.1: Speed of sound in different media at 25 ºC State Substance Speed in m/s Solids Aluminium 6420 Nickel 6040 Steel 5960 Iron 5950 Brass 4700 Glass (Flint) 3980 Liquids Water (Sea) 1531 Water (distilled) 1498 Ethanol 1207 Methanol 1103 Gases Hydrogen 1284 Helium 965 Air 346 Oxygen 316 Sulphur dioxide 213 Fig. 11.9: Reflection of sound

[Page 8]
SCIENCE134 11.3.1ECHO If we shout or clap near a suitable reflecting object such as a tall building or a mountain,we will hear the same sound again a little later . This sound which we hear is called an echo. The sensation of sound persists in our brain for about 0.1 s. To hear a distinct echo the time interval between the original sound and the reflected one must be at least 0.1s. If we take the speed of sound to be 344 m/s at a given temperatur e, say at 22 ºC in air , the sound must go to the obstacle and reach back the ear of the listener on reflection after 0.1s. Hence, the total distance covered by the sound from the point of generation to the reflecting surface and back should be at least (344 m/s) × 0.1 s = 34.4 m. Thus, for hearing distinct echoes, the minimum distance of the obstacle from the source of sound must be half of this distance, that is, 17.2 m. This distance will change with the temperature of air. Echoes may be heard more than once due to successive or multiple reflections. The rolling of thunder is due to the successive reflections of the sound from a number of reflecting surfaces, such as the clouds and the land. 11.3.2REVERBERATION A sound created in a big hall will persist by repeated reflection from the walls until it is reduced to a value where it is no longer audible. The repeated reflection that results in this persistence of sound is called reverberation. In an auditorium or big hall excessive reverberation is highly undesirable. To reduce reverberation, the roof and walls of the auditorium are generally covered with sound-absorbent materials like compressed fibreboard, rough plaster or draperies. The seat materials are also selected on the basis of their sound absorbing properties. Example 11.2 A person clapped his hands near a cliff and heard the echo after 2 s. What is the distance of the cliff from the person if the speed of the sound, v is taken as 346 m s–1? Solution: Given, Speed of sound, v = 346 m s–1 Time taken for hearing the echo, t = 2 s Distance travelled by the sound = v × t = 346 m s–1 × 2 s = 692 m In 2 s sound has to travel twice the distance between the cliff and the person. Hence, the distance between the cliff and the person = 692 m/2 = 346 m. Q Horn Megaphone Fig 11.10: A megaphone and a horn. uestion 1. An echo is heard in 3 s. What is the distance of the reflecting surface from the source, given that the speed of sound is 342 m s–1? 11.3.3USES OF MULTIPLE REFLECTION OF SOUND 1. Megaphones or loudhailers, horns, musical instruments such as trumpets and shehanais, are all designed to send sound in a particular direction without spreading it in all directions, as shown in Fig 11.10.