FORCE AND LAWS OF MOTION 95 The force exerted on the ball F is, F = ma = (20/1000) kg × (– 0.02 m s-2) = – 0.0004 N. The negative sign implies that the frictional force exerted by the table is opposite to the direction of motion of the ball. 8.5 Third Law of Motion The first two laws of motion tell us how an applied force changes the motion and provide us with a method of deter mining the for ce. The third law of motion states that when one object exerts a force on another object, the second object instantaneously exerts a force back on the first. These two forces are always equal in magnitude but opposite in direction. These forces act on different objects and never on the same object. In the game of football sometimes we, while looking at the football and trying to kick it with a gr eater for ce, collide with a player of the opposite team. Both feel hurt because each applies a for ce to the other. In other wor ds, there is a pair of for ces and not just one for ce. The two opposing forces are also known as action and reaction forces. Let us consider two spring balances connected together as shown in Fig. 8.10. The fixed end of balance B is attached with a rigid support, like a wall. When a force is applied through the free end of spring balance A, it is observed that both the spring balances show the same readings on their scales. It means that the force exerted by spring balance A on balance B is equal but opposite in dir ection to the for ce exerted by the balance B on balance A. Any of these two forces can be called as action and the other as reaction. This gives us an alternative statement of the third law of motion i.e., to every action there is an equal and opposite r eaction. However, it must be remembered that the action and reaction always act on two different objects, simultaneously. Fig. 8.10: Action and reaction forces are equal and opposite. Suppose you are standing at rest and intend to start walking on a road. You must accelerate, and this r equir es a for ce in accordance with the second law of motion. Which is this force? Is it the muscular effort you exert on the r oad? Is it in the dir ection we intend to move? No, you push the r oad below backwards. The road exerts an equal and opposite force on your feet to make you move forward. It is important to note that even though the action and r eaction for ces ar e always equal in magnitude, these for ces may not produce accelerations of equal magnitudes. This is because each force acts on a different object that may have a different mass. When a gun is fir ed, it exerts a forwar d force on the bullet. The bullet exerts an equal and opposite force on the gun. This results in the recoil of the gun (Fig. 8.11). Since the gun has a much greater mass than the bullet, the acceleration of the gun is much less than the acceleration of the bullet. The third law of motion can also be illustrated when a sailor jumps out of a rowing boat. As the sailor jumps forward, the force on the boat moves it backwards (Fig. 8.12). Fig. 8.11: A forward force on the bullet and recoil of the gun. Reprint 2025-26
The force exerted on the hall Fis. B A F= ma= (20/1000) kg x (- 0.02 m s?) fIETEVEEED) Terres, = = 0.0004 N. o( thin mE a”) The negative sign implies that the irictional pores ; ererte by ne table * Fig. 8.10: Action and reaction forces are equal and Peat opposite. Suppose you are standing at rest and : : intend to start walking on a read. You must 8.5 Third Law of Motion accelerate, and this requires a force in The first two laws of motion tell us how an accordance with the second law of motion. on - ° . Which is this force? Is it the muscular effort applied force changes the motion and provide 9 us with a method of determining the force. you exert on the road? Is it in the direction ” > tS re? y 4 rs <: The third law of motion states that when one hel intend to ite oe you push the Toad object exerts a force on another object, the ow nae wards. © roa exer's an equa second object instantaneously exerts a force and opposite foree on your feet to make you back on the first. These two forces are always at ean - tt hat even thoust equal in magnitude but opposite in direction. the : - epee | ° rn a even . Neate These forces act on different objects and never © a Hon ane reaction pore es are a way § on the same object. In the game of football equal in magnitude . these forces may not sometimes we, while looking at the football produce accelerations of equal magnitudes. and trying to kick it with aA greater force This is because each force acts on a different collide with a player of the opposite team. oie that may have a aiferen! Mass. ard Both feel hurt because each applies a force . nen a gun is Ure. U exer s a forwar to the other. In other words, there is a pair of force on the bullet. The bullet exerts an equal forces and not just one force. The two and opposite force on the gun. This results in opposing forces are also known as action and the recoil of the gun (Fig. 8.11). Since the gun reaction forces has a much greater mass than the bullet, the ‘ Let us consider two spring balances acceleration of the gun is much less than the connected together as shown in Fig 8.10 The acceleration of the bullet. The third law of fixed end of balance B is attached with a rigid motion can also be illustrated when a sailor support, like a wall. When a foree is applied jumps out of a rowing boat. As the sailor through the free end of spring balance A. it is jumps forward, the force on the boat moves it observed that both the spring balances show backwards (Fig. 8.12). the same readings on their scales. It means Accelerating force that the force exerted by spring balance A on on the bullet balance B is equal but opposite in direction to the force exerted by the balance B on a | —- ee oe balance A. Any of these two forces can be called as action and the other as reaction. This gives 2, . us an alternative statement of the third law of motion i.e.. to every action there is an equal . and opposite reaction. However, it must be remembered that the action and reaction always act on two different objects Pig. 8.11: A forward force on the bullet and recoil simultaneously. of the gun. Fores axp Laws o¢ Monon 95 Reprint 2025-26