SCIENCE96 What you have learnt • First law of motion: An object continues to be in a state of rest or of uniform motion along a straight line unless acted upon by an unbalanced force. • The natural tendency of objects to resist a change in their state of rest or of uniform motion is called inertia. • The mass of an object is a measure of its inertia. Its SI unit is kilogram (kg). • Force of friction always opposes motion of objects. • Second law of motion: The rate of change of momentum of an object is proportional to the applied unbalanced force in the direction of the force. Activity ______________ 8.4 • Request two children to stand on two separate carts as shown in Fig. 8.13. • Give them a bag full of sand or some other heavy object. Ask them to play a game of catch with the bag. • Does each of them experience an instantaneous force as a result of throwing the sand bag? • You can paint a white line on cartwheels to observe the motion of the two carts when the children throw the bag towar ds each other . Fig. 8.12: As the sailor jumps in forward direction, the boat moves backwards. Fig. 8.13 Now, place two children on one cart and one on another cart. The second law of motion can be seen, as this arrangement would show different accelerations for the same force. The cart shown in this activity can be constructed by using a 12 mm or 18 mm thick plywood board of about 50 cm × 100 cm with two pairs of hard ball-bearing wheels (skate wheels are good to use). Skateboards are not as effective because it is difficult to maintain straight-line motion. Reprint 2025-26
© st iy a, ¢ rs x ue ‘ — fa d OS TL A “a — nina a fem - = fe Fig. 8.12: As the sailor jumps in forward direction, a oe = a the boat inoves backwards. wv w Activity CB Fig. 8.13 * = Request two children to stand on two Now. place two children on one cart and separate carts as shown in Fig. 8.13. one on another cart. The second law of motion ¢ Give them a bag full of sand or some can be seen, as this arrangement would show other heavy object. Ask them to play a different accelerations for the same force. sail ot catch with the bag. - The cart shown in this activity can be ° . oes each of them experience an constructed by using a 12 mm or 18 mm thick instantaneous force as a result of lywood board of about 50 ¢ 100 ¢ Ath throwing the sand bag? plywood board of about 50 cm x em w ° You can paint a white line on two pairs of hard ball-bearing wheels (skate cartwheels to observe the motion of the wheels are good to use). Skateboards are not two carts when the children throw the as effective because it is difficult to maintain bag towards each other. straight-line motion. |) What eo AX® you have aa AR i yr a / learnt ° First law of motion: An object continues to be in a state of rest or of uniform motion along a straight line unless acted upon by an unbalanced force. . The natural tendency of objects to resist a change in their state of rest or of uniform motion is called inertia. ° The mass of an object is a measure of its inertia. Its SI unit is kilogram (kg). ° Foree of friction always opposes motion of objects. ° Second law of motion: The rate of change of momentum of an object is proportional to the applied unbalanced force in the direction of the force. 96 Sewer, Reprint 2025-26