SCIENCE98 stopped with a negative acceleration of 1.7 m s –2? 9. What is the momentum of an object of mass m, moving with a velocity v ? (a) ( mv)2 (b) mv2 (c) ½ mv2 (d) mv 10. Using a horizontal force of 200 N, we intend to move a wooden cabinet across a floor at a constant velocity. What is the friction force that will be exerted on the cabinet? 11. According to the third law of motion when we push on an object, the object pushes back on us with an equal and opposite force. If the object is a massive truck parked along the roadside, it will probably not move. A student justifies this by answering that the two opposite and equal forces cancel each other . Comment on this logic and explain why the truck does not move. 12. A hockey ball of mass 200 g travelling at 10 m s –1 is struck by a hockey stick so as to return it along its original path with a velocity at 5 m s –1. Calculate the magnitude of change of momentum occurred in the motion of the hockey ball by the force applied by the hockey stick. 13. A bullet of mass 10 g travelling horizontally with a velocity of 150 m s –1 strikes a stationary wooden block and comes to rest in 0.03 s. Calculate the distance of penetration of the bullet into the block. Also calculate the magnitude of the force exerted by the wooden block on the bullet. 14. An object of mass 1 kg travelling in a straight line with a velocity of 10 m s –1 collides with, and sticks to, a stationary wooden block of mass 5 kg. Then they both move off together in the same straight line. Calculate the total momentum just before the impact and just after the impact. Also, calculate the velocity of the combined object. 15. An object of mass 100 kg is accelerated uniformly from a velocity of 5 m s –1 to 8 m s –1 in 6 s. Calculate the initial and final momentum of the object. Also, find the magnitude of the force exerted on the object. 16. Akhtar, Kiran and Rahul wer e riding in a motor car that was moving with a high velocity on an expressway when an insect hit the windshield and got stuck on the windscreen. Akhtar and Kiran started pondering over the situation. Kiran suggested that the insect suffered a greater change in momentum as compared to the change in momentum of the motorcar (because the change in the velocity of the insect was much more than that of the motorcar). Akhtar said that since the motorcar was moving with a larger velocity, it exerted a larger force on the insect. And as a result the insect died. Rahul while putting an entirely new explanation Reprint 2025-26
stopped with a negative acceleration of 1.7 m s *? 9. What is the momentum of an object of mass m, moving with a velocity v? (a) (mv)? (b) mu? (c) Y2 mi (d) mov 10. Using a horizontal force of 200 N, we intend to move a wooden cabinet across a floor at a constant velocity. What is the friction force that will be exerted on the cabinet? Il. According to the third law of motion when we push on an object. the object pushes back on us with an equal and opposite force. If the object is a massive truck parked along the roadside, it will probably not move. A student justifies this by answering that the two opposite and equal forces cancel cach other. Comment on this logic and explain why the truck does not move. 12. A hockey ball of mass 200 g travelling at 10 ms! is struck by a hockey stick so as to return it along its original path with a velocity at 5m s'!. Calculate the magnitude of change of momentum occurred in the motion of the hockey ball by the force applied by the hockey stick. 13. A bullet of mass 10 g travelling horizontally with a velocity of 150 m 8! strikes a stationary wooden block and comes to rest in 0.03 s. Calculate the distance of penetration of the bullet into the block. Also calculate the magnitude of the force exerted by the wooden block on the bullet. 14. An object of mass | kg travelling in a straight line with a velocity of 10 ms! collides with, and sticks to, a stationary wooden block of mass 5 kg. Then they both move off together in the same straight line. Calculate the total momentum just before the impact and just after the impact. Also, calculate the velocity of the combined object. 15. An object of mass 100 kg is accelerated uniformly from a velocity of 5m s'!to8ms!'in 6s. Calculate the initial and final momentum of the object. Also, find the magnitude of the force exerted on the object. 16. Akhtar, Kiran and Rahul were riding in a motorcar that was moving with a high velocity on an expressway when an insect hit the windshield and got stuck on the windscreen. Akhtar and Kiran started pondering over the situation. Kiran suggested that the insect suffered a greater change in momentum as compared to the change in momentum of the motorcar (because the change in the velocity of the insect was much more than that of the motorcar). Akhtar said that since the motorcar was moving with a larger velocity, it exerted a larger force on the insect. And as a result the insect died. Rahul while putting an entirely new explanation 98 ScHENck : Reprint 2025-26