In the pr evious chapter , we described the motion of an object along a straight line in terms of its position, velocity and acceleration. We saw that such a motion can be unifor m or non-uniform. We have not yet discovered what causes the motion. Why does the speed of an object change with time? Do all motions require a cause? If so, what is the natur e of this cause? In this chapter we shall make an attempt to quench all such curiosities. For many centuries, the pr oblem of motion and its causes had puzzled scientists and philosophers. A ball on the ground, when given a small hit, does not move forever. Such observations suggest that r est is the “natural state” of an object. This r emained the belief until Galileo Galilei and Isaac Newton developed an entir ely different approach to understand motion. In our everyday life we observe that some effort is r equired to put a stationary object into motion or to stop a moving object. W e ordinarily experience this as a muscular effort and say that we must push or hit or pull on an object to change its state of motion. The concept of force is based on this push, hit or pull. Let us now ponder about a ‘force’. What is it? In fact, no one has seen, tasted or felt a force. However, we always see or feel the effect of a force. It can only be explained by describing what happens when a for ce is applied to an object. Pushing, hitting and pulling of objects ar e all ways of bringing objects in motion (Fig. 8.1). They move because we make a force act on them. From your studies in earlier classes, you are also familiar with the fact that a force can be used to change the magnitude of velocity of an object (that is, to make the object move faster or slower) or to change its direction of motion. We also know that a force can change the shape and size of objects (Fig. 8.2). (a) The trolley moves along the direction we push it. (c) The hockey stick hits the ball forward (b) The drawer is pulled. Fig. 8.1: Pushing, pulling, or hitting objects change their state of motion. (a) (b) Fig. 8.2: (a) A spring expands on application of force; (b) A spherical rubber ball becomes oblong as we apply force on it. 8 F FF FFORCE ORCEORCE ORCEORCE AND ANDAND ANDAND L L L L LAWS AWSAWS AWSAWS OF OFOF OFOF M M M M MOTION OTIONOTION OTIONOTION C hapter Reprint 2025-26
=z Pere C hapter 8 Ole ForcE AND Laws or MOTION In the previous chapter, we described the In our everyday life we observe that some motion of an object along a straight line in — effort is required to put a stationary object terms of its position, velocity and acceleration. into motion or to stop a moving object. We We saw that such a motion can be uniform — ordinarily experience this as a muscular effort or non-uniform. We have not yet discovered — and say that we must push or hit or pull on what causes the motion. Why does the speed — an object to change its state of motion. The of an object change with time? Do all motions — concept of force is based on this push, hit or require a cause? If so, what is the nature of — pull. Let us now ponder about a ‘force’. What this cause? In this chapter we shall make an __ is it? In fact, no one has seen, tasted or felt a attempt to quench all such curiosities. force. However, we always see or feel the effect For many centuries, the problem of | of a force. It can only be explained by motion and its causes had puzzled scientists | describing what happens when a force is and philosophers. A ballon the ground. when — applied to an object. Pushing, hitting and given a small hit. does not move forever. Such — pulling of objects are all ways of bringing observations suggest that restis the “natural — objects in motion (Fig. 8.1). They move because state” of an object. This remained the belief | we make a force act on them. until Galileo Galilei and Isaac Newton From your studies in earlier classes. you developed an entirely different approach to — are also familiar with the fact that a force can understand motion. be used to change the magnitude of velocity of an object (that is, to make the object move faster or slower) or to change its direction of oa _ motion, We also know that a force can change eer ey ey the shape and size of objects (Fig. 8.2). mm iti hey ae we fi ow ° <_— — fal The trolley moves along the fb) The drawer is pulled. — TKK direction we push tt fa} (0 The hockey stick hits the ball torward Pig. 8.2: (a) A spring expands on application of force: Pig. 8.12 Pushing, pulling, or hitting objects change (b) A spherical rubber ball becomes oblong their state of motion. as we apply force ort it, Reprint 2025-26