SCIENCE92 92929292 its velocity changes, that is, the object gets an acceleration. We would now like to study how the acceleration of an object depends on the force applied to it and how we measure a force. Let us recount some observations from our everyday life. During the game of table tennis if the ball hits a player it does not hurt him. On the other hand, when a fast moving cricket ball hits a spectator, it may hurt him. A truck at rest does not require any attention when parked along a roadside. But a moving truck, even at speeds as low as 5 m s –1, may kill a person standing in its path. A small mass, such as a bullet may kill a person when fired from a gun. These observations suggest that the impact produced by the objects depends on their mass and velocity. Similarly, if an object is to be accelerated, we know that a greater force is required to give a greater velocity. In other words, there appears to exist some quantity of importance that combines the object’s mass and its velocity. One such property called momentum was introduced by Newton. The momentum, p of an object is defined as the product of its mass, m and velocity, v. That is, p = mv (8.1) Momentum has both direction and magnitude. Its direction is the same as that of velocity, v. The SI unit of momentum is kilogram-metr e per second (kg m s -1). Since the application of an unbalanced force brings a change in the velocity of the object, it is therefore clear that a for ce also pr oduces a change of momentum. Let us consider a situation in which a car with a dead battery is to be pushed along a straight road to give it a speed of 1 m s-1, which is sufficient to start its engine. If one or two persons give a sudden push (unbalanced force) to it, it hardly starts. But a continuous push over some time results in a gradual acceleration of the car to this speed. It means that the change of momentum of the car is not only determined by the magnitude of the force but also by the time during which the force is exerted. It may then also be concluded that the force necessary to change the momentum of an object depends on the time rate at which the momentum is changed. The second law of motion states that the rate of change of momentum of an object is proportional to the applied unbalanced force in the direction of force. 8.4.1 MATHEMATICAL FORMULATION OF SECOND LAW OF MOTION Suppose an object of mass, m is moving along a straight line with an initial velocity, u. It is uniformly accelerated to velocity, v in time, t by the application of a constant for ce, F throughout the time, t. The initial and final momentum of the object will be, p1 = mu and p2 = mv r espectively. The change in momentum ∝ p2 – p1 ∝ mv – mu ∝ m × (v – u). The rate of change of momentum ∝ ( )× −m v u t Or, the applied force, F ∝ ( )× −m v u t ( )× −= km v u t F (8.2) = kma (8.3) Here a ∝ = [(v – u)/t] is the acceleration, which is the rate of change of velocity. The quantity, k is a constant of proportionality. The SI units of mass and acceleration are kg and m s -2 respectively. The unit of force is so chosen that the value of the constant, k becomes one. For this, one unit of force is defined as the amount that produces an acceleration of 1 m s-2 in an object of 1 kg mass. That is, 1 unit of force = k × (1 kg) × (1 m s-2). Thus, the value of k becomes 1. From Eq. (8.3) F = ma (8.4) The unit of force is kg m s -2 or newton, which has the symbol N. The second law of Reprint 2025-26
its velocity changes, that is, the object gets an on the time rate at which the momentum is acceleration. We would now like to study how — changed. the acceleration of an object depends on the The second law of motion states that the force applied to it and how we measure a force. — rate of change of momentum of an object is Let us recount some observations from our — proportional to the applied unbalanced force everyday life. During the game oftable tennis — in the direction of force. if the ball hits a player it does not hurt him. On the other hand, when a fast moving cricket 8.4.1 MATHEMATICAL FORMULATION OF ball hits a spectator, it may hurt him. A truck SECOND LAW OF MOTION at rest does not require any attention when parked along a roadside. But a moving truck, — Suppose an object of mass, mis moving along even at speeds as low as 5m s"', may killa a straight line with an initial velocity, a. It is person standing in its path. A small mass. — uniformly accelerated to velocity, vin time, f such as a bullet may kill a person when fired — by the application of a constant force, F from a gun. These observations suggest that throughout the time, “ The initial and final the impact produced by the objects depends | momentum of the object will be, p, = mu and on their mass and velocity. Similarly. ifan — p, = mv respectively. object is to be accelerated, we know that a The change . . le CHAN ge dn momentui mop, p greater force is required to give a greater anv Ima velocity. In other words, there appears to exist a omx(vou). some quantity of importance that combines the object’s mass and its velocity. One such . . . mx(u ou) ve ine The rate of change of momentum «© property called momentum was introduced by t Newton. The momentum, p of an object is Or, the applied force. defined as the product of its mass. m and velocity, v. That is, rp, 2 x(v_u) p=mv (8.1) t Momentum has both direction and P= fon x(v_u) magnitude. Its direction is the same as that t of velocity, v. The SI unit of momentum is =kma (8.3) kilogram-metre per second (kg m s"'). Since the application of an unbalanced force brings Here a7 = [(v— 19/4] is the acceleration, a change in the velocity of the object, it is which is the rate of change of velocity. The therefore clear that a force also produces a quantity, kis a constant of proportionality. The change of momentum. Sl units of mass and acceleration are kg and Let us consider a situation in which acar —'™_ 8% respectively. The unit of force is so with a dead battery is to be pushed along a chosen that the value of the constant, k straight road to give it a speed of 1 ms", which becomes one. For this, one unit of force is is sufficient to start its engine. [fone or two defined as the amount that produces an persons give a sudden push (unbalanced force) acceleration of 1 ms? inan object of 1 kg mass. to it. it hardly starts. Buta continuous push — That is, over some lime results in a gradual acceleration 1 unit of force = kx (1 kg) « (1 ms”). of the car to this speed. It means that the change of momentum of the car is not only determined — Thus, the value of A becomes 1. From Eq. (8.3) by the magnitude of the force but also by the F-=ma (8.4) time during which the force is exerted. It may then also be concluded that the force necessary The unit of force is kg m s? or newton, to change the momentum of an object depends = which has the symbol N. The second law of 92 Sewn, : Reprint 2025-26