FORCE AND LAWS OF MOTION 93 9393 9393 motion gives us a method to measure the force acting on an object as a product of its mass and acceleration. The second law of motion is often seen in action in our everyday life. Have you noticed that while catching a fast moving cricket ball, a fielder in the ground gradually pulls his hands backwards with the moving ball? I n doing so, the fielder increases the time during which the high velocity of the moving ball decreases to zero. Thus, the acceleration of the ball is decreased and therefore the impact of catching the fast moving ball (Fig. 8.8) is also reduced. If the ball is stopped suddenly then its high velocity decreases to zero in a very short interval of time. Thus, the rate of change of momentum of the ball will be large. Therefore, a large force would have to be applied for holding the catch that may hurt the palm of the fielder. In a high jump athletic event, the athletes are made to fall either on a cushioned bed or on a sand bed. This is to increase the time of the athlete’s fall to stop after making the jump. This decreases the rate of change of momentum and hence the force. Try to ponder how a karate player breaks a slab of ice with a single blow. The first law of motion can be mathematically stated from the mathematical expression for the second law of motion. Eq. (8.4) is F = ma or F ( ) −= m v u t (8.5) or Ft = mv – mu That is, when F = 0, v = u for whatever time, t is taken. This means that the object will continue moving with uniform velocity , u throughout the time, t. If u is zero then v will also be zero. That is, the object will remain at rest. Exampl ExamplExampl ExamplExampleee ee 8.1 8.18.1 8.18.1 A constant force acts on an object of mass 5 kg for a duration of 2 s. I t increases the object’ s velocity from 3 m s –1 to 7 m s -1. F ind the magnitude of the applied force. Now, if the force was applied for a duration of 5 s, what would be the final velocity of the object? Solution: Solution:Solution: Solution:Solution: We have be en given that u = 3 m s –1 and v = 7 m s-1, t = 2 s and m = 5 kg. From Eq. (8.5) we have, F ( ) −= m v u t Substitution of values in this relation gives F = 5 kg (7 m s-1 – 3 m s-1)/2 s = 10 N. Now, if this force is applied for a duration of 5 s (t = 5 s), then the final velocity can be calculated by rewriting Eq. (8.5) as = + Ftv u m On substituting the values of u, F, m and t, we get the final velocity, v = 13 m s-1. Fig. 8.8: Fig. 8.8:Fig. 8.8: Fig. 8.8:Fig. 8.8: A fielder pulls his hands gradually with the moving ball while holding a catch. Reprint 2025-26
motion gives us a method to measure the force The first law of motion can be acting on an object as a product ofits mass mathematically stated from the mathematical and acceleration. expression for the second law of motion. Eq. The second law of motion is often seen in (8.4) is action in our everyday life. Have you noticed that while catching a fast moving cricket ball, Pe mus a fielder in the ground gradually pulls his meu) hands backwards with the moving ball? In or FOF (8.5) doing so, the fielder increases the time during . which the high velocity of the moving ball or Ffsuy mn decreases to zero. Thus, the acceleration of — That is. when f= 0, v =u for whatever time, the ball is decreased and therefore the impact fis taken. This means that the object will of catching the fast moving ball (Fig. 8.8) is continue moving with uniform velocity, u also reduced, If the ball is stopped suddenly throughout the time, ¢. If is zero then ywill then its high velocity decreases to zero ia algo be zero. That is, the object will remain very short interval of time. Thus, the rate of at rest change of mornentutn of the ball will be large. o Therefore, a large force would have to be | |]©§ ————— applied for holding the catch that may hurt Example 8.1 A constant force acts on an the palm of the fielder. In a high jump athletic object of mass 5 kg for a duration of event, the athletes are made to fall either on 2s. It increases the objectS velocity a cushioned bed or on a sand bed. This is to from 3 mos! to 7 mos. Find the increase the time of the athletes fall to stop magnitude of the applied force. Now, if after making the jump. This decreases the rate the force was applied for a duration of of change of momentum and hence the force. 5s, what would be the final velocity of Try to ponder how a karate player breaks a the object? . slab of ice with a single blow. Solution: VE We have been given that uv = 3 ms"! z nan and v= 7mes?, ¢=2sand m =5 kg. e ce i From Eq. (8.5) we have, ©p A oo ae) y yo A ~ LYS ! ~ aN , Substitution of values in this relation \ 7 ‘ \ A S ag) gives ‘a fi i Wi F=5kg(7ms'-3ms)/2s= 10N. K, aN iN \ ~~ , Now, if this force is applied for a } AN — an duration of 5s (f= 5s), then the final y ) 7 ) ) velocity can be calculated by rewriting js ! Eq. (8.5) as we i, i / faa tthe Vy : | veut ED ag ioe m =e ~ On substituting the values of a, & mand t, we get the final velocity, Fig. 8.8: A fielder pulls his hands eradiually with the v=13ms". moving Dall while holding a catch, —_ Force axp Laws or Moron 93 Reprint 2025-26 :