FORCE AND LAWS OF MOTION 97 • The SI unit of force is kg m s–2. This is also known as newton and represented by the symbol N. A force of one newton produces an acceleration of 1 m s –2 on an object of mass 1 kg. • The momentum of an object is the product of its mass and velocity and has the same direction as that of the velocity. Its SI unit is kg m s –1. • Third law of motion: To every action, there is an equal and opposite reaction and they act on two different bodies. Exercises 1. An object experiences a net zero external unbalanced force. Is it possible for the object to be travelling with a non-zero velocity? If yes, state the conditions that must be placed on 2. When a carpet is beaten with a stick, dust comes out of it, Explain. 3. Why is it advised to tie any luggage kept on the roof of a bus with a rope? 4. A batsman hits a cricket ball which then rolls on a level ground. After covering a short distance, the ball comes to rest. The ball slows to a stop because (a) the batsman did not hit the ball hard enough. (b) velocity is proportional to the force exerted on the ball. (c) there is a force on the ball opposing the motion. (d) there is no unbalanced force on the ball, so the ball would want to come to rest. 5. A truck starts from rest and rolls down a hill with a constant acceleration. It travels a distance of 400 m in 20 s. Find its acceleration. Find the force acting on it if its mass is 7 tonnes (Hint: 1 tonne = 1000 kg.) 6. A stone of 1 kg is thrown with a velocity of 20 m s –1 across the frozen surface of a lake and comes to rest after travelling a distance of 50 m. What is the force of friction between the stone and the ice? 7. A 8000 kg engine pulls a train of 5 wagons, each of 2000 kg, along a horizontal track. If the engine exerts a force of 40000 N and the track offers a friction force of 5000 N, then calculate: (a) the net accelerating force and (b) the acceleration of the train. 8. An automobile vehicle has a mass of 1500 kg. What must be the force between the vehicle and road if the vehicle is to be Reprint 2025-26
e The SI unit of force is kg ms’. This is also known as newton and represented by the symbol N. A force of one newton produces an acceleration of 1 ms? on an object of mass | kg. ° The momentum of an object is the product of its mass and velocity and has the same direction as that of the velocity. Its SI unit is kg ms. ° Third law of motion: To every action, there is an equal and opposite reaction and they act on two different bodies. . | d)s«Exercises oy 1. An object experiences a net zero external unbalanced force. i \ ee Is it possible for the object to be travelling with a non-zero { ae velocity? If yes, state the conditions that must be placed on Sy, 2. When a carpet is beaten with a stick, dust comes out of it, Explain. 3. Why is it advised to tie any luggage kept on the roof of a bus with a rope? 4. A batsman hits a cricket ball which then rolls on a level ground. After covering a short distance, the ball comes to rest. The ball slows to a stop because (a) the batsman did not hit the ball hard enough. (b) velocity is proportional to the force exerted on the ball. (c) there is a force on the ball opposing the motion. (d) there is no unbalanced force on the ball, so the ball would want to come to rest. 5. Atruck starts from rest and rolls down a hill with a constant acceleration. It travels a distance of 400 m in 20 s. Find its acceleration. Find the foree acting on it if its mass is 7 tonnes (Hint: 1 tonne = 1000 kg.) 6. A stone of | kg is thrown with a velocity of 20 ms! across the frozen surtace of a lake and comes to rest after travelling a distance of 50 m. What is the force of friction between the stone and the ice? 7. A 8000 kg engine pulls a train of 5 wagons, cach of 2000 kg, along a horizontal track. If the engine exerts a force of 40000 N and the track offers a friction force of 5000 N, then calculate: (a) the net accelerating force and (b) the acceleration of the train. 8. An automobile vehicle has a mass of 1500 kg. What must be the force between the vehicle and road if the vehicle is to be Fores ano Lave ov Monow 97 Reprint 2025-26