FORCE AND LAWS OF MOTION 89 removed completely, the object would continue to move with the velocity it has acquired till then. 8.2 First Law of Motion By observing the motion of objects on an inclined plane Galileo deduced that objects move with a constant speed when no for ce acts on them. He observed that when a marble rolls down an inclined plane, its velocity increases [Fig. 8.5(a)]. In the next chapter, you will learn that the marble falls under the unbalanced for ce of gravity as it r olls down and attains a definite velocity by the time it reaches the bottom. Its velocity decreases when it climbs up as shown in Fig. 8.5(b). Fig. 8.5(c) shows a marble resting on an ideal frictionless plane inclined on both sides. Galileo ar gued that when the marble is released from left, it would roll down the slope and go up on the opposite side to the same height fr om which it was r eleased. If the inclinations of the planes on both sides ar e equal then the marble will climb the same distance that it covered while rolling down. If the angle of inclination of the right-side plane were gradually decr eased, then the marble would travel further distances till it r eaches the original height. If the right-side plane were ultimately made horizontal (that is, the slope is reduced to zero), the marble would continue to travel for ever trying to r each the same height that it was r eleased fr om. The unbalanced forces on the marble in this case are zero. It thus suggests that an unbalanced (external) for ce is r equired to change the motion of the marble but no net for ce is needed to sustain the uniform motion of the marble. In practical situations it is dif ficult to achieve a zer o unbalanced for ce. This is because of the presence of the frictional force acting opposite to the dir ection of motion. Thus, in practice the marble stops after travelling some distance. The ef fect of the frictional force may be minimised by using a smooth marble and a smooth plane and providing a lubricant on top of the planes. Fig. 8.5: (a) the downward motion; (b) the upward motion of a marble on an inclined plane; and (c) on a double inclined plane. Newton further studied Galileo’s ideas on for ce and motion and pr esented thr ee fundamental laws that govern the motion of objects. These thr ee laws ar e known as Newton’s laws of motion. The first law of motion is stated as: An object remains in a state of rest or of unifor m motion in a straight line unless compelled to change that state by an applied force. In other words, all objects resist a change in their state of motion. In a qualitative way, the tendency of undisturbed objects to stay at r est or to keep moving with the same velocity is called inertia. This is why, the first law of motion is also known as the law of inertia. Certain experiences that we come across while travelling in a motor car can be explained on the basis of the law of inertia. We tend to remain at rest with respect to the seat until the driver applies a braking for ce to stop the motorcar. With the application of brakes, the car slows down but our body tends to continue in the same state of motion because of its inertia. A sudden application of brakes may thus cause injury to us by impact Reprint 2025-26
removed completely, the object would continue to move with the velocity it has acquired ull then. 8.2 First Law of Motion By observing the motion of objects on an fa) () inclined plane Galileo deduced that objects move with a constant speed when no force acts on them. He observed that when a marble rolls down an inclined plane, its velocity NY increases (Fig. 8.5(a)]. In the next chapter, you will learn that the marble falls under the unbalanced force of gravity as it rolls down yy GEILE and attains a definite velocity by the time it reaches the bottom. Its velocity decreases —. when it climbs up as shown in Fig. 8.5(b). {cl Fig. 8.5(c) shows a marble resting on an ideal frictionless plane inclined on both sides. Fig. 8.5: (a) the downward motion: (bh) the upward Galileo argued that when the marble is motion of a marble on an inclined plane: released from left. it would roll down the slope and (c}on a double inclined plane. and Ko uP on the Opposite side to the same Newton further studied Galileo's ideas on eight from which it was released. If the . . pen “dee force and motion and presented three inclinations of the planes on both sides are fundamental laws that govern the motion of equal then the marble will climb the same biects. These three laws are known as distance that it covered while rolling down. If objec Is. * aan ve ae ° Newton's laws of motion. The first law of the angle of inclination of the right-side plane motion is stated as: were gradually decreased, then the marble An object remains in a state of rest or of would travel further distances ull it reaches Uniform motion in a straight line unless the original height. Ifthe right-side plane were compelled to change that state by an ultimately made horizontal (that is, the slope applied force. , . is reduced to zero), the marble would continue In other words, all objects resist a change to travel forever trying to reach the same in their stafe of motion. In a qualitative way, height that it was released from. The the tendency of undisturbed objects to stay unbalanced forces on the marble in this case — at rest or to keep moving with the same are zero. It thus suggests that an unbalanced velocity is called inertia. This is why, the first (external) force is required to change the law of motion is also known as the law motion of the marble but no net force is of inertia. needed to sustain the uniform motion of the Certain experiences that we come across marble. In practical situations it is difficult while travelling in a motorcar can be to achieve a zero unbalanced force. This is explained on the basis of the law of inertia. because of the presence of the frictional force — We tend to remain at rest with respect to the acting opposite to the direction of motion. — seat until the driver applies a braking force Thus, in practice the marble stops after — to stop the motorear. With the application of travelling some distance. The effect of the — brakes, the car slows down but our body frictional force may be minimised by using a tends to continue in the same state of motion smooth marble and a smooth plane and because of its inertia. A sudden application of providing a lubricant on top of the planes. brakes may thus cause injury to us by impact Foxes, aso Las or Monox 89 Reprint 2025-26 :