[Page 9]
WORK AND ENERGY 121 Example 10.6 An object of mass 12 kg is at a certain height above the gr ound. If the potential energy of the object is 480 J, find the height at which the object is with r espect to the gr ound. Given, g = 10 m s–2. Solution: Mass of the object, m = 12 kg, potential energy, Ep = 480 J. Ep = mgh 480 J = 12 kg × 10 m s–2 × h h = –2 480 J 120 kg m s = 4 m. The object is at the height of 4 m. 10.2.5ARE VARIOUS ENERGY FORMS INTERCONVERTIBLE? Can we convert ener gy fr om one for m to another? W e find in natur e a number of instances of conversion of ener gy from one form to another. Activity ___________ 10.13 • Sit in small groups. • Discuss the various ways of ener gy conversion in nature. • Discuss following questions in your group: (a) How do green plants produce food? (b) Where do they get their energy from? (c) Why does the air move fr om place to place? (d) How ar e fuels, such as coal and petroleum formed? (e) What kinds of energy conversions sustain the water cycle? Activity ___________ 10.14 • Many of the human activities and the gadgets we use involve conversion of energy from one form to another. • Make a list of such activities and gadgets. • Identify in each activity/gadget the kind of energy conversion that takes place. 10.2.6LAW OF CONSERVATION OF ENERGY In activities 10.13 and 10.14, we learnt that the form of energy can be changed from one form to another. What happens to the total energy of a system during or after the process? Whenever energy gets transformed, the total energy remains unchanged. This is the law of conservation of energy. According to this law, energy can only be converted from one form to another; it can neither be created or destroyed. The total energy before and after the transformation remains the same. The law of conservation of energy is valid in all situations and for all kinds of transformations. Consider a simple example. Let an object of mass, m be made to fall freely from a height, h. At the start, the potential energy is mgh and kinetic energy is zero. Why is the kinetic energy zero? It is zero because its velocity is zero. The total energy of the object is thus mgh. As it falls, its potential energy will change into kinetic energy. If v is the velocity of the object at a given instant, the kinetic energy would be ½mv2. As the fall of the object continues, the potential energy would decrease while the kinetic energy would increase. When the object is about to reach the ground, h = 0 and v will be the highest. Therefore, the kinetic energy would be the largest and potential energy the least. However, the sum of the potential energy and kinetic energy of the object would be the same at all points. That is, potential energy + kinetic energy = constant or 1 constant. 2 2mgh + mv = (10.7) The sum of kinetic energy and potential energy of an object is its total mechanical energy. We find that during the free fall of the object, the decrease in potential energy, at any point in its path, appears as an equal amount of increase in kinetic energy. (Here the effect of air resistance on the motion of the object has been ignored.) There is thus a continual transformation of gravitational potential energy into kinetic energy. Reprint 2025-26
Example 10.6 An object of mass 12 kg is 10.2.6 LAW OF CONSERVATION OF ENERGY at a certain height above the ground. In activities 10.13 and 10.14, we learnt that Ifthe potential energy of the object is the form of energy can be changed from one 480 J, find the height at which the form to another. What happens to the total object is with respect to the ground. + nf ey eeureat po aft eo croreaecest ne i. energy of a system during or after the process? Given, g= 10. ms”. Whenever energy gets transformed, the total Solution: energy remains unchanged. This is the law of conservation of energy. According to this law, Mass of the object, m= 12 kg. energy can only be converted from one form potential energy, FE, = 480 J. to another; it can neither be created or EB = mgh destroyed. The total energy before and after A80 J = 12kgx 1Oms?xh the transformation remains the same. The law 480 J of conservation of energy is valid in ho= 120 kgms® = Am. all situations and for all Kinds of transformations. The object is at the height of 4m. Consider a simple example. Let an object TTT: Of mass, a7 be made to fall freely froma height, 10.2.5 ARE VARIOUS ENERGY FORMS #2. At the start. the potential energy is mgh and ve prt ED Kinetic energy is zero. Why is the kinetic INTERCONVERTIBLES energy zero? It is zero because its velocity is Can we convert energy from one form to — ero. The total energy of the object is thus mgh. another? We find in nature a number of — Asit falls, its potential energy will change into instances of conversion of energy from one kinetic energy. If vis the velocity of the object form to another. at a given instant, the kinetic energy would be . Yan”, As the fall of the object continues, the Activity 10.13 potential energy would decrease while the - cane kinetic energy would increase. When the object . Sit in small groups. ° Discuss the various ways of energy is about to reach the ground, A = 0 and vwill conversion in nature. be the highest. Therefore. the kinetic energy ¢ Discuss following questions in your would be the largest and potential energy the group: least. However, the sum of the potential energy (a) How do green plants produce food? and kinetic energy of the object would be the (b) Where do they get their energy trom? same at all points. That is. (c) Why does the air move from place 7 wear . ate to place? potential energy + kinetic energy = constant (d) How are fuels, such as coal and or petroleum formed? if > (e) What kinds of energy conversions mah + 2 mo"= constant (10.7) sustain the water cycle? . The sum of kinetic energy and potential energy Activity 10.14 ofan object is its total mechanical energy. TT We find that during the free fall of the object, ¢ = Many of the human activities and the the decrease in potential energy, at any point gadgets we use involve conversion of in its path, appears as an equal amount of energy from one form to another. increase in kinetic energy. (Here the effect of . Make a list of such activities and wae . . . gadgets. air resistance on the motion of the object has . Identify in each acuvity/gadget the been ignored.) There is thus a continual kind of energy conversion that takes transformation of gravitational potential place. energy into kinetic energy. Worn avo Exnrar 121 Reprint 2025-26 :

[Page 10]
SCIENCE122 A stronger person may do certain work in relatively less time. A more powerful vehicle would complete a journey in a shorter time than a less powerful one. We talk of the power of machines like motorbikes and motorcars. The speed with which these vehicles change ener gy or do work is a basis for their classification. Power measures the speed of work done, that is, how fast or slow work is done. Power is defined as the rate of doing work or the rate of transfer of ener gy. If an agent does a work W in time t, then power is given by: Power = work/time or WP = t (10.8) The unit of power is watt [in honour of James Watt (1736 – 1819)] having the symbol W. 1 watt is the power of an agent, which does work at the rate of 1 joule per second. We can also say that power is 1 W when the rate of consumption of energy is 1 J s–1. 1 watt = 1 joule/second or 1 W = 1 J s–1. We express larger rates of energy transfer in kilowatts (kW). 1 kilowatt = 1000 watts 1 kW = 1000 W 1 kW = 1000 J s–1. The power of an agent may vary with time. This means that the agent may be doing work at different rates at different intervals of time. Therefore the concept of average power is useful. We obtain average power by dividing the total energy consumed by the total time taken. Example 10.7 Two girls, each of weight 400 N climb up a rope through a height of 8 m. We name one of the girls A and the other B. Girl A takes 20 s while B takes 50 s to accomplish this task. What is the power expended by each girl? Solution: (i) Power expended by girl A: Weight of the girl, mg = 400 N Displacement (height), h = 8 m Activity ___________ 10.15 • An object of mass 20 kg is dropped from a height of 4 m. Fill in the blanks in the following table by computing the potential energy and kinetic energy in each case. Height at Potential Kinetic Ep + Ek which object energy energy is located (Ep= mgh) (Ek = mv2/2) m J J J 4 3 2 1 Just above the ground • For simplifying the calculations, take the value of g as 10 m s–2. Think it over ! What would have happened if nature had not allowed the transformation of energy? There is a view that life could not have been possible without transformation of energy. Do you agree with this? 10.3Rate of Doing Work Do all of us work at the same rate? Do machines consume or transfer energy at the same rate? Agents that transfer ener gy do work at different rates. Let us understand this from the following activity: Activity ___________ 10.16 • Consider two children, say A and B. Let us say they weigh the same. Both start climbing up a r ope separately. Both reach a height of 8 m. Let us say A takes 15 s while B takes 20 s to accomplish the task. • What is the work done by each? • The work done is the same. However , A has taken less time than B to do the work. • Who has done more work in a given time, say in 1 s? Reprint 2025-26
Activity 10.15 Astronger person may do certain work in TTT relatively less time. A more powerful vehicle * An object of mass 20 kg is dropped would complete a journey in a shorter time from a height of 4 m. Fillin the blanks than a less powerful one. We talk of the power in the following table by computing of machines like motorbikes and motorcars. the potential enerey and Kinetic The speed with which these vehicles change energy in cach case. : 5 energy or do work is a basis for their classification. Power measures the speed of which object | energy energy , work done, that is, how fast or slow work is is located = |(t5,= mgh) |(E, = mv?/2) done. Power is defined as the rate of doing work or the rate of transfer of energy. If an m J J J agent does a work W in time ¢, then power is 4 given by: 3 Power = work/time 2 w 1 or Pe t (10.8) Just above op . the ground The unit of power is watt [in honour of James Watt (1736 - 1819)] having the symbol ¢ For simplifying the calculations, take W. 1 watt is the power of an agent, which the value of gas 10 ms’. does work at the rate of 1 joule per second. We can also say that power is 1 W when the Think it over ! rate of consumption of energy is 1 J sl. What would have happened if nature had 1 watt = 1 joule/second or 1 W = 1d 8". not allowed the transformation of energy? We express larger rates of energy transfer in There is a view that life could not have kilowatts (kW). been possible without transformation of 1 kilowatt = 1000 watts energy. Do you agree with this’? 1kW = 1000 W 1kWw = 1000J 871. . The power of an agent may vary with time. 10.3 Rate of Doing Work This means that the agent may be doing work Do all of us work at the same rate? Do at different rates at different intervals of time. machines consume or transfer energy at the Therefore the concept of average power is same rate? Agents that transfer energy do Useful. We obtain average power by dividing work at different rates. Let us understand this — the total energy consumed by the total time from the following activity: taken. Activity TTT 10.16 Example 10.7 Two girls, each of weight 400 * Consider two children, say A and B. N climb up a rope through a height of 8 Let us say they weigh the same. Both m. We name one of the girls A and the start chmbing Up a rope separately. other B. Girl A takes 20 s while B takes Both reach a height of 8 m. Let us say A takes 13 8 while B takes 20 s to 50s to accomplish this task. What is the accomplish the task. power expended by each girl’? . What is the work done by cach? Solution: . The work done 1s the same. However, A has taken less time than B to do (i) Power expended by girl A: the work. ; ; Weight of the girl, mg= 400 N . Who has done more work in a given ° " time. say in 1 8? 7 Displacement (height), A= 8m 122 Science. : Reprint 2025-26