[Page 9]
WORK AND ENERGY 121 Example 10.6 An object of mass 12 kg is at a certain height above the gr ound. If the potential energy of the object is 480 J, find the height at which the object is with r espect to the gr ound. Given, g = 10 m s–2. Solution: Mass of the object, m = 12 kg, potential energy, Ep = 480 J. Ep = mgh 480 J = 12 kg × 10 m s–2 × h h = –2 480 J 120 kg m s = 4 m. The object is at the height of 4 m. 10.2.5ARE VARIOUS ENERGY FORMS INTERCONVERTIBLE? Can we convert ener gy fr om one for m to another? W e find in nature a number of instances of conversion of ener gy from one form to another. Activity 10.13 • Sit in small groups. • Discuss the various ways of ener gy conversion in nature. • Discuss following questions in your group: (a) How do green plants produce food? (b) Where do they get their energy from? (c) Why does the air move fr om place to place? (d) How ar e fuels, such as coal and petroleum formed? (e) What kinds of energy conversions sustain the water cycle? Activity 10.14 • Many of the human activities and the gadgets we use involve conversion of energy from one form to another. • Make a list of such activities and gadgets. • Identify in each activity/gadget the kind of energy conversion that takes place. 10.2.6LAW OF CONSERVATION OF ENERGY In activities 10.13 and 10.14, we learnt that the form of energy can be changed from one form to another. What happens to the total energy of a system during or after the process? Whenever energy gets transformed, the total energy remains unchanged. This is the law of conservation of energy. According to this law, energy can only be converted from one form to another; it can neither be created or destroyed. The total energy before and after the transformation remains the same. The law of conservation of energy is valid in all situations and for all kinds of transformations. Consider a simple example. Let an object of mass, m be made to fall freely from a height, h. At the start, the potential energy is mgh and kinetic energy is zero. Why is the kinetic energy zero? It is zero because its velocity is zero. The total energy of the object is thus mgh. As it falls, its potential energy will change into kinetic energy. If v is the velocity of the object at a given instant, the kinetic energy would be ½mv2. As the fall of the object continues, the potential energy would decrease while the kinetic energy would increase. When the object is about to reach the ground, h = 0 and v will be the highest. Therefore, the kinetic energy would be the largest and potential energy the least. However, the sum of the potential energy and kinetic energy of the object would be the same at all points. That is, potential energy + kinetic energy = constant or 1 constant. 2 2mgh + mv = (10.7) The sum of kinetic energy and potential energy of an object is its total mechanical energy. We find that during the free fall of the object, the decrease in potential energy, at any point in its path, appears as an equal amount of increase in kinetic energy. (Here the effect of air resistance on the motion of the object has been ignored.) There is thus a continual transformation of gravitational potential energy into kinetic energy.

[Page 10]
SCIENCE122 A stronger person may do certain work in relatively less time. A more powerful vehicle would complete a journey in a shorter time than a less powerful one. We talk of the power of machines like motorbikes and motorcars. The speed with which these vehicles change ener gy or do work is a basis for their classification. Power measures the speed of work done, that is, how fast or slow work is done. Power is defined as the rate of doing work or the rate of transfer of ener gy. If an agent does a work W in time t, then power is given by: Power = work/time or WP = t (10.8) The unit of power is watt [in honour of James Watt (1736 – 1819)] having the symbol W. 1 watt is the power of an agent, which does work at the rate of 1 joule per second. We can also say that power is 1 W when the rate of consumption of energy is 1 J s–1. 1 watt = 1 joule/second or 1 W = 1 J s–1. We express larger rates of energy transfer in kilowatts (kW). 1 kilowatt = 1000 watts 1 kW = 1000 W 1 kW = 1000 J s–1. The power of an agent may vary with time. This means that the agent may be doing work at different rates at different intervals of time. Therefore the concept of average power is useful. We obtain average power by dividing the total energy consumed by the total time taken. Example 10.7 Two girls, each of weight 400 N climb up a rope through a height of 8 m. We name one of the girls A and the other B. Girl A takes 20 s while B takes 50 s to accomplish this task. What is the power expended by each girl? Solution: (i) Power expended by girl A: Weight of the girl, mg = 400 N Displacement (height), h = 8 m Activity 10.15 • An object of mass 20 kg is dropped from a height of 4 m. Fill in the blanks in the following table by computing the potential energy and kinetic energy in each case. Height at Potential Kinetic Ep + Ek which object energy energy is located (Ep= mgh) (Ek = mv2/2) m J J J 4 3 2 1 Just above the ground • For simplifying the calculations, take the value of g as 10 m s–2. Think it over ! What would have happened if nature had not allowed the transformation of energy? There is a view that life could not have been possible without transformation of energy. Do you agree with this? 10.3Rate of Doing Work Do all of us work at the same rate? Do machines consume or transfer energy at the same rate? Agents that transfer ener gy do work at different rates. Let us understand this from the following activity: Activity 10.16 • Consider two children, say A and B. Let us say they weigh the same. Both start climbing up a r ope separately. Both reach a height of 8 m. Let us say A takes 15 s while B takes 20 s to accomplish the task. • What is the work done by each? • The work done is the same. However , A has taken less time than B to do the work. • Who has done more work in a given time, say in 1 s?

[Page 11]
WORK AND ENERGY 123 power, P = Work done/time taken = mgh t = 500 N × 6.75 m 9 s = 375 W. Power is 375 W. uestions 1. What is power? 2. Define 1 watt of power. 3. A lamp consumes 1000 J of electrical energy in 10 s. What is its power? 4. Define average power. Activity 10.17 • Take a close look at the electric meter installed in your house. Observe its features closely. • Take the readings of the meter each day at 6.30 am and 6.30 pm. • Do this activity for about a week. • How many ‘units’ are consumed during day time? • How many ‘units’ are used during night? • Tabulate your observations. • Draw inferences from the data. • Compare your observations with the details given in the monthly electricity bill (One can also estimate the electricity to be consumed by specific appliances by tabulating their known wattages and hours of operation). Time taken, t = 20 s From Eq. (10.8), Power, P = Work done/time taken = mgh t = 400 N × 8 m 20 s = 160 W. (ii) Power expended by girl B: Weight of the girl, mg = 400 N Displacement (height), h = 8 m Time taken, t = 50 s Power, P = mgh t = 400 N × 8 m 50 s = 64 W. Power expended by girl A is 160 W. Power expended by girl B is 64 W. Example 10.8 A boy of mass 50 kg runs up a staircase of 45 steps in 9 s. If the height of each step is 15 cm, find his power. Take g = 10 m s–2. Solution: Weight of the boy, mg = 50 kg × 10 m s–2 = 500 N Height of the stair case, h = 45 × 15/100 m = 6.75 m Time taken to climb, t = 9 s From Eq. (10.8), Q

[Page 12]
SCIENCE124 What you have learnt • Work done on an object is defined as the magnitude of the force multiplied by the distance moved by the object in the direction of the applied force. The unit of work is joule: 1 joule = 1 newton × 1 metre. • Work done on an object by a force would be zer o if the displacement of the object is zero. • An object having capability to do work is said to possess energy. Energy has the same unit as that of work. • An object in motion possesses what is known as the kinetic energy of the object. An object of mass, m moving with velocity v has a kinetic energy of 2mv1 2 . • The energy possessed by a body due to its change in position or shape is called the potential energy. The gravitational potential energy of an object of mass, m raised through a height, h from the earth’s surface is given by m g h . • According to the law of conservation of energy, energy can only be transformed from one form to another; it can neither be created nor destroyed. The total energy before and after the transformation always remains constant. • Energy exists in nature in several forms such as kinetic energy, potential energy, heat energy, chemical energy etc. The sum of the kinetic and potential energies of an object is called its mechanical energy. • Power is defined as the rate of doing work. The SI unit of power is watt. 1 W = 1 J/s. Exercises 1. Look at the activities listed below. Reason out whether or not work is done in the light of your understanding of the term ‘work’. • Suma is swimming in a pond. • A donkey is carrying a load on its back. • A wind-mill is lifting water from a well. • A green plant is carrying out photosynthesis. • An engine is pulling a train.

[Page 13]
WORK AND ENERGY 125 • Food grains are getting dried in the sun. • A sailboat is moving due to wind energy. 2. An object thrown at a certain angle to the ground moves in a curved path and falls back to the ground. The initial and the final points of the path of the object lie on the same horizontal line. What is the work done by the force of gravity on the object? 3. A battery lights a bulb. Describe the energy changes involved in the process. 4. Certain force acting on a 20 kg mass changes its velocity from 5 m s –1 to 2 m s –1. Calculate the work done by the force. 5. A mass of 10 kg is at a point A on a table. It is moved to a point B. If the line joining A and B is horizontal, what is the work done on the object by the gravitational force? Explain your answer . 6. The potential energy of a freely falling object decreases progressively. Does this violate the law of conservation of energy? Why? 7. What are the various energy transformations that occur when you are riding a bicycle? 8. Does the transfer of energy take place when you push a huge rock with all your might and fail to move it? Where is the energy you spend going? 9. A certain household has consumed 250 units of energy during a month. How much energy is this in joules? 10. An object of mass 40 kg is raised to a height of 5 m above the ground. What is its potential energy? If the object is allowed to fall, find its kinetic energy when it is half-way down. 11. What is the work done by the force of gravity on a satellite moving round the earth? Justify your answer . 12. Can there be displacement of an object in the absence of any force acting on it? Think. Discuss this question with your friends and teacher . 13. A person holds a bundle of hay over his head for 30 minutes and gets tired. Has he done some work or not? Justify your answer. 14. An electric heater is rated 1500 W . How much ener gy does it use in 10 hours? 15. Illustrate the law of conservation of energy by discussing the energy changes which occur when we draw a pendulum bob to one side and allow it to oscillate. Why does the bob