[Page 3]
WORK AND ENERGY 115 done on an object when a for ce of 1 N displaces it by 1 m along the line of action of the force. Look at Eq. (10.1) carefully. What is the work done when the for ce on the object is zero? What would be the work done when the displacement of the object is zero? Refer to the conditions that ar e to be satisfied to say that work is done. Example 10.1 A force of 5 N is acting on an object. The object is displaced through 2 m in the direction of the force (Fig. 10.2). If the force acts on the object all through the displacement, then work done is 5 N × 2 m =10 N m or 10 J. Fig. 10.4 Consider a situation in which an object is moving with a uniform velocity along a particular direction. Now a retarding force, F, is applied in the opposite direction. That is, the angle between the two directions is 180º. Let the object stop after a displacement s. In such a situation, the work done by the force, F is taken as negative and denoted by the minus sign. The work done by the force is F × (–s) or (–F × s). It is clear from the above discussion that the work done by a force can be either positive or negative. To understand this, let us do the following activity: Activity _____________ 10.4 • Lift an object up. Work is done by the force exerted by you on the object. The object moves upwar ds. The for ce you exerted is in the dir ection of displacement. However , ther e is the force of gravity acting on the object. • Which one of these for ces is doing positive work? • Which one is doing negative work? • Give reasons. Work done is negative when the force acts opposite to the dir ection of displacement. Work done is positive when the force is in the direction of displacement. Example 10.2 A porter lifts a luggage of 15 kg from the ground and puts it on his head 1.5 m above the ground. Calculate the work done by him on the luggage. Solution: Mass of luggage, m = 15 kg and displacement, s = 1.5 m. Fig. 10.2 uestion 1. A force of 7 N acts on an object. The displacement is, say 8 m, in the dir ection of the for ce (Fig. 10.3). Let us take it that the force acts on the object through the displacement. What is the work done in this case? Fig. 10.3 Consider another situation in which the force and the displacement are in the same direction: a baby pulling a toy car parallel to the ground, as shown in Fig. 10.4. The baby has exerted a for ce in the dir ection of displacement of the car. In this situation, the work done will be equal to the product of the force and displacement. In such situations, the work done by the force is taken as positive. Q Reprint 2025-26
done on an object when a force of 1 N on) displaces it by 1 m along the line of action of go ee . Net) the force. Zornes . 4 5) Look at Eq. (10.1) carefully. What is the work done when the force on the object is (7 a) zero? What would be the work done when om) 3 the displacement of the object is zero? Refer < to the conditions that are to be satisfied to Fig. 10.4 say that work is done. Consider a situation in which an object is NNN moving with a uniform velocity along a Example 10.1 A force of 5 N is acting on particular direction. Now a retarding force, F, an object. The object is displaced is applied in the opposite direction. That is, through 2 m in the direction of the force the angle between the two directions is 180°. (Fig. 10.2). Ifthe force acts on the object Let the object stop after a displacement s. In all through the displacement, then work such a situation, the work done by the force, done is5Nx2m =10ONmor 10d. Fis taken as negative and denoted by the minus sign. The work done by the force is Fx {-s) or (-F’« s). —— 2m — It is clear from the above discussion that 5\—> - CJ the work done by a force can be either positive or negative. To understand this, let us do the Fig. 10.2 following activity: Activity i+: (" vest an . Lift an object up. Work is done by the | \ 1. A force of 7X acts on an object. force exerted by you on the object. The The displacement is, sav 8 m. in object moves upwards. The force you the direction of the force exerted is in the direction of | (Fig. 10.3). Let us take it thatthe displacement. However, there 1s the | force acts on the object Hhrough lorce of gravity acting on the object. U aes ‘ bad . Which one of these forces is doing the displacement What is the positive work? work done in this case? * = Which one is doing negative work? . Give reasons, _ am ————_> Work done is negative when the force acts iN? Fs rT opposite to the direction of displacement. Fig. 10.3 Work done is positive when the force is in the ooo direction of displacement. Consider another situation in which the Example 10.2 A porter lifts a luggage of force and the displacement are in the same 15 kg from the ground and puts it on direction: a baby pulling a toy car parallel to his head 1.5 m above the ground. the ground, as shown in Fig. 10.4. The baby Calculate the work done by him on the has exerted a force in the direction of luggage. displacement of the car. In this situation, the Solution: work done will be equal to the product of the force and displacement. In such situations, Mass of luggage. mr = 15 kg and the work done by the force is taken as positive. displacement, $= 1.5 m. Worn avo Exnrar 115 Reprint 2025-26 :

[Page 4]
SCIENCE116 raised hammer falls on a nail placed on a piece of wood, it drives the nail into the wood. We have also observed children winding a toy (such as a toy car) and when the toy is placed on the floor, it starts moving. When a balloon is filled with air and we press it we notice a change in its shape. As long as we press it gently, it can come back to its original shape when the force is withdrawn. However, if we press the balloon hard, it can even explode producing a blasting sound. In all these examples, the objects acquire, through different means, the capability of doing work. An object having a capability to do work is said to possess energy. The object which does the work loses energy and the object on which the work is done gains energy. How does an object with energy do work? An object that possesses energy can exert a force on another object. When this happens, energy is transferred from the former to the latter. The second object may move as it receives energy and therefore do some work. Thus, the first object had a capacity to do work. This implies that any object that possesses energy can do work. The energy possessed by an object is thus measured in terms of its capacity of doing work. The unit of energy is, therefore, the same as that of work, that is, joule (J). 1 J is the ener gy r equir ed to do 1 joule of work. Sometimes a larger unit of energy called kilo joule (kJ) is used. 1 kJ equals 1000 J. 10.2.1FORMS OF ENERGY Luckily the world we live in provides energy in many different forms. The various forms include mechanical energy (potential energy + kinetic ener gy), heat ener gy, chemical energy, electrical energy and light energy. Think it over ! How do you know that some entity is a form of energy? Discuss with your friends and teachers. Work done, W = F × s = mg × s = 15 kg × 10 m s-2 × 1.5 m = 225 kg m s-2 m = 225 N m = 225 J Work done is 225 J. uestions 1. When do we say that work is done? 2. Write an expression for the work done when a for ce is acting on an object in the direction of its displacement. 3. Define 1 J of work. 4. A pair of bullocks exerts a force of 140 N on a plough. The field being ploughed is 15 m long. How much work is done in ploughing the length of the field? 10.2Energy Life is impossible without energy. The demand for energy is ever incr easing. Where do we get ener gy fr om? The Sun is the biggest natural source of energy to us. Many of our energy sources are derived from the Sun. We can also get energy from the nuclei of atoms, the interior of the earth, and the tides. Can you think of other sources of energy? Activity _____________ 10.5 • A few sources of energy are listed above. There are many other sources of energy. List them. • Discuss in small gr oups how certain sources of energy are due to the Sun. • Are there sources of energy which are not due to the Sun? The word energy is very often used in our daily life, but in science we give it a definite and pr ecise meaning. Let us consider the following examples: when a fast moving cricket ball hits a stationary wicket, the wicket is thr own away. Similarly, an object when raised to a certain height gets the capability to do work. You must have seen that when a Q Reprint 2025-26
Work done, Wo= Fx s= mex s raised hammer falls on a nail placed on a piece = 15kgx10ms’x 1.5m of wood, it drives the nail into the wood. We = 225kgms?m have also observed children winding a toy = 225Nm= 225J (such as a toy car) and when the toy is placed Work done is 225 J. on the floor, it starts moving. When a balloon is filled with air and we press it we notice a (" uestions change in its shape. As long as we press it i || ; : gently, it can come back to its original shape ho When do we sav that work is when the force is withdrawn. However, if we donc? press the balloon hard, it can even explode | 2. Write an expression tor the work producing a blasting sound. In all these | donc when a force is acting on examples. the objects acquire, through UJ an object in the direction of its different means, the capability of doing work. displacement. An object having a capability to do work is & Detine 13 of work. : said to possess energy. The object which does 4. A pair of bullocks exerts a forec the work loses energy and the object on which of 140N ona plough. The tield the work is done gains energy. being ploughed fs 15 m long. How does an object with energy do work? How amen work is done in An object that possesses energy can exert a ploughing the length of the field? force on another object. When this happens, energy is transferred from the former to the 10.2 Energy latter. The second object may move as it receives energy and therefore do some work. Life is impossible without energy. The demand — Thus, the first object had a capacity to do for energy is ever increasing. Where do we — work. This implies that any object that get energy from? The Sun is the biggest possesses energy can do work. natural source of energy to us. Many of our The energy possessed by an object is thus energy sources are derived from the Sun. We — measured in terms of its capacity of doing can also get energy from the nuclei of atoms, work. The unit of energy is, therefore, the same the interior of the earth, and the tides. Can as that of work, that is. joule (J). 1 J is the you think of other sources of energy? . . energy required to do 1 joule of work. Activity 10.5 Sometimes a larger unit of energy called kilo joule (kJ) is used. 1 kJ equals 1000 J. . A few sources of energy are listed above. There are many other sources 10.2.1 FoRMS OF ENERGY of energy. List them. ¢ Discuss in small groups how certain Luckily the world we live in provides energy in sourecs of energy are due to the Sun. many different forms. The various forms ° ar there ne Su ot energy which are include mechanical energy (potential energy not due to The Sun: + kinetic energy), heat energy. chemical The word energy is very often used in our energy. electrical energy and light energy. daily life, but in science we give it a definite : : : and precise meaning. Let us consider the following examples: when a fast moving Think it over ! cricket ball hits a stationary wicket. the wicket How do you know that some entity is a is thrown away. Similarly, an object when form of energy? Discuss with your friends raised to a certain height gets the capability and teachers. . to do work. You must have seen that when a 116 Science. : Reprint 2025-26