[Page 1]
In the previous few chapters we have talked about ways of describing the motion of objects, the cause of motion and gravitation. Another concept that helps us understand and interpret many natural phenomena is ‘work’. Closely related to work are energy and power. In this chapter we shall study these concepts. All living beings need food. Living beings have to per form several basic activities to survive. We call such activities ‘life processes’. The energy for these pr ocesses comes fr om food. We need energy for other activities like playing, singing, r eading, writing, thinking, jumping, cycling and running. Activities that are strenuous r equire more energy. Animals too get engaged in activities. For example, they may jump and run. They have to fight, move away fr om enemies, find food or find a safe place to live. Also, we engage some animals to lift weights, carry loads, pull carts or plough fields. All such activities require energy. Think of machines. List the machines that you have come across. What do they need for their working? Why do some engines require fuel like petr ol and diesel? Why do living beings and machines need energy? 10.1Work What is work? There is a dif ference in the way we use the term ‘work’ in day-to-day life and the way we use it in science. T o make this point clear let us consider a few examples. 10.1.1NOT MUCH ‘ WORK’ IN SPITE OF WORKING HARD! Kamali is pr eparing for examinations. She spends lot of time in studies. She reads books, draws diagrams, organises her thoughts, collects question papers, attends classes, discusses pr oblems with her friends, and performs experiments. She expends a lot of ener gy on these activities. In common parlance, she is ‘working hard’. All this ‘hard work’ may involve very little ‘work’ if we go by the scientific definition of work. You are working hard to push a huge rock. Let us say the rock does not move despite all the ef fort. Y ou get completely exhausted. However, you have not done any work on the rock as there is no displacement of the rock. You stand still for a few minutes with a heavy load on your head. You get tired. You have exerted yourself and have spent quite a bit of your energy. Are you doing work on the load? The way we understand the term ‘work’ in science, work is not done. You climb up the steps of a staircase and reach the second floor of a building just to see the landscape from there. You may even climb up a tall tree. If we apply the scientific definition, these activities involve a lot of work. In day-to-day life, we consider any useful physical or mental labour as work. Activities like playing in a field, talking with friends, humming a tune, watching a movie, attending a function ar e sometimes not consider ed to be work. What constitutes ‘work’ depends on the way we define it. W e use and define the ter m work dif ferently in science. T o understand this let us do the following activities: Activity _____________ 10.1 • We have discussed in the above paragraphs a number of activities which we normally consider to be work 10 W WW WWORK ORKORK ORKORK AND ANDAND ANDAND E E E E ENERGY NERGYNERGY NERGYNERGY C hapter Reprint 2025-26
Crna pter 10 Ble WorK AND ENERGY In the previous few chapters we have talked = draws diagrams, organises her thoughts, about ways of describing the motion of — collects question papers. attends classes. objects, the cause of motion and gravitation. — discusses problems with her friends, and Another concept that helps us understand and — performs experiments. She expends a lot of interpret many natural phenomena is ‘work’. energy on these activities. In common Closely related to work are energy and power. — parlance, she is ‘working hard’. All this “hard In this chapter we shall study these concepts. — work’ may involve very little ‘work’ if we go by All living beings need food. Living beings — the scientific definition of work. have to perform several basic activities to You are working hard to push a huge rock. survive. We call such activities ‘life processes’. Let us say the rock does not move despite all The energy for these processes comes from — the effort. You get completely exhausted. food. We need energy for other activities like — However, you have not done any work on the playing. singing, reading, writing, thinking. — rock as there is no displacement of the rock. jumping, cycling and running. Activities that You stand still for a few minutes with a are strenuous require more energy. heavy load on your head. You get tired. You Animals too get engaged in activities. For — have exerted yourself and have spent quite a example. they may jump andrun, They have __ bit of your energy. Are you doing work on the to fight. move away from enemies, find food — load? The way we understand the term ‘work’ or find a safe place to live. Also, we engage — in science, work is not done. some animals to lift weights, carry loads, pull You climb up the steps of a staircase and carts or plough fields. All such activities — reach the second floor of a building just to require energy. see the landscape from there. You may even Think of machines. List the machines that — climb up a tall tree. If we apply the scientific you have come across. What do they need for definition, these activities involve a lot of work. their working? Why do some engines require In day-to-day life, we consider any useful fuel like petrol and diesel’? Why do living — physical or mental labour as work. Activities beings and machines need energy? like playing in a field, talking with friends, humming a tune, watching a movie, attending 10.1 Work a function are sometimes not considered to be work. What constitutes ‘work’ depends What is work? There is a difference in the — on the way we define it. We use and define way we use the term ‘work’ in day-to-day life — the term work differently in science. To and the way we use it in science. To make — understand this let us do the following this point clear let us considera fewexamples. — activities: 10.1.1 Not MUCH ‘WORK’ IN SPITE OF Activity 10.1 WORKING HARD! . We have discussed in the above Kamali is preparing for examinations. She paragraphs a number of activities spends lot of time in studies. She reads books, which we normally consider to be work Reprint 2025-26

[Page 2]
SCIENCE114 Activity _____________ 10.3 • Think of situations when the object is not displaced in spite of a force acting on it. • Also think of situations when an object gets displaced in the absence of a force acting on it. • List all the situations that you can think of for each. • Discuss with your friends whether work is done in these situations. 10.1.3WORK DONE BY A CONSTANT FORCE How is work defined in science? T o understand this, we shall first consider the case when the force is acting in the direction of displacement. Let a constant for ce, F act on an object. Let the object be displaced through a distance, s in the direction of the force (Fig. 10.1). Let W be the work done. We define work to be equal to the pr oduct of the for ce and displacement. Work done = force × displacement W = F s (10.1) in day-to-day life. For each of these activities, ask the following questions and answer them: (i) What is the work being done on? (ii) What is happening to the object? (iii) Who (what) is doing the work? 10.1.2SCIENTIFIC CONCEPTION OF WORK To understand the way we view work and define work from the point of view of science, let us consider some situations: Push a pebble lying on a sur face. The pebble moves through a distance. You exerted a for ce on the pebble and the pebble got displaced. In this situation work is done. A girl pulls a trolley and the trolley moves through a distance. The girl has exerted a force on the trolley and it is displaced. Therefore, work is done. Lift a book thr ough a height. T o do this you must apply a for ce. The book rises up. There is a force applied on the book and the book has moved. Hence, work is done. A closer look at the above situations reveals that two conditions need to be satisfied for work to be done: (i) a force should act on an object, and (ii) the object must be displaced. If any one of the above conditions does not exist, work is not done. This is the way we view work in science. A bullock is pulling a cart. The cart moves. There is a force on the cart and the cart has moved. Do you think that work is done in this situation? Activity _____________ 10.2 • Think of some situations from your daily life involving work. • List them. • Discuss with your friends whether work is being done in each situation. • Try to reason out your response. • If work is done, which is the force acting on the object? • What is the object on which the work is done? • What happens to the object on which work is done? Fig. 10.1 Thus, work done by a force acting on an object is equal to the magnitude of the force multiplied by the distance moved in the dir ection of the for ce. W ork has only magnitude and no direction. In Eq. (10.1), if F = 1 N and s = 1 m then the work done by the for ce will be 1 N m. Here the unit of work is newton metre (N m) or joule (J). Thus 1 J is the amount of work Reprint 2025-26
in day-to-day life. For each of these Activity 10.3 activities, ask the following questions TTT . and answer them: . Think of situations when the object (i) What is the work being done on? is not displaced in spite of a force (ii) What is happening to the object? acting on it. (ii) Who (what) is doing the work? . Also think of situations when an object gets displaced in the absence of a force spp Ropr pres ps. saeayer: sae . acting on it. 10.1.2 SCIENTIFIC CONCEPTION OF WORK . List all the situations that you can To understand the way we view work and . unk of for cach. friends whett define work from the point of view of science, wok dene, oe \Inese situations ner let us consider some situations: : —_ - Push a pebble lying on a surface. The . . vee pene pebble moves through a distance. You exerted 10.1.3 WORK DONE BY A CONSTANT a force on the pebble and the pebble got FORCE displaced. In this situation work is done. llow is work defined in science? To h A an Puts trolley and the trolley Meda understand this, we shall first consider the Wrouga a distance. “The girl has exerted @ ase when the force is acting in the direction force on the trolley and it is displaced. Sd. ° Therefore. work is done of displacement. nerelore, WORK 18 Gone. on Let a constant force, Fact on an object. Lift a book through a height. To do this Let the object be displaced through a you must apply a force. The book rises up. distance, s in the direction of the force (Fig. There is a force applied on the book and the 10.1). Let Whe the work done. We define work book has moved. Hence, work is done. to be equal to the product of the force and A closer look at the above situations od displacement. reveals that two conditions need to be Work done = force x displacement satisfied for work to be done: (i) a force should W = Fs xenspl (10.1) act on an object, and (ii) the object must be a . displaced. <—_—_ : ——— > If any one of the above conditions does E at not exist. work is not done. This is the way : we view work in science. A bullock is pulling a cart. The cart moves. There is a force on the cart and the cart has moved. Do you think that work is done in this situation? Activity 10.2 « ‘Think of some situations from your Fig. 10.1 daily life involving work. ¢ last them, Thus, work done by a force acting on an ¢ Discuss with your triends whether object is equal to the magnitude of the force work is being done in each situation. multiplied by the distance moved in the ° Try to reason out your response. - direction of the force. Work has only . If work 1s done, which is the force acting magnitude and no direction . on the object? oe “ . . ® = What is the object on which the work In Eq. (10.1). if F= 1 Nand s= 1m then is done? the work done by the force will be 1 Nm. . What happens to the object on which Here the unit of work is newton metre (N m) work is done? or joule (J). Thus 1 J is the amount of work 114 Science. Reprint 2025-26