[Page 1]
In the previous few chapters we have talked about ways of describing the motion of objects, the cause of motion and gravitation. Another concept that helps us understand and interpret many natural phenomena is ‘work’. Closely related to work are energy and power. In this chapter we shall study these concepts. All living beings need food. Living beings have to per form several basic activities to survive. We call such activities ‘life processes’. The energy for these pr ocesses comes fr om food. We need energy for other activities like playing, singing, r eading, writing, thinking, jumping, cycling and running. Activities that are strenuous r equire more energy. Animals too get engaged in activities. For example, they may jump and run. They have to fight, move away fr om enemies, find food or find a safe place to live. Also, we engage some animals to lift weights, carry loads, pull carts or plough fields. All such activities require energy. Think of machines. List the machines that you have come across. What do they need for their working? Why do some engines require fuel like petr ol and diesel? Why do living beings and machines need energy? 10.1Work What is work? There is a dif ference in the way we use the term ‘work’ in day-to-day life and the way we use it in science. T o make this point clear let us consider a few examples. 10.1.1NOT MUCH ‘ WORK’ IN SPITE OF WORKING HARD! Kamali is pr eparing for examinations. She spends lot of time in studies. She reads books, draws diagrams, organises her thoughts, collects question papers, attends classes, discusses pr oblems with her friends, and performs experiments. She expends a lot of ener gy on these activities. In common parlance, she is ‘working hard’. All this ‘hard work’ may involve very little ‘work’ if we go by the scientific definition of work. You are working hard to push a huge rock. Let us say the rock does not move despite all the ef fort. Y ou get completely exhausted. However, you have not done any work on the rock as there is no displacement of the rock. You stand still for a few minutes with a heavy load on your head. You get tired. You have exerted yourself and have spent quite a bit of your energy. Are you doing work on the load? The way we understand the term ‘work’ in science, work is not done. You climb up the steps of a staircase and reach the second floor of a building just to see the landscape from there. You may even climb up a tall tree. If we apply the scientific definition, these activities involve a lot of work. In day-to-day life, we consider any useful physical or mental labour as work. Activities like playing in a field, talking with friends, humming a tune, watching a movie, attending a function ar e sometimes not consider ed to be work. What constitutes ‘work’ depends on the way we define it. W e use and define the ter m work differently in science. T o understand this let us do the following activities: Activity 10.1 • We have discussed in the above paragraphs a number of activities which we normally consider to be work 10 W WW WWORK ORKORK ORKORK AND ANDAND ANDAND E E E E ENERGY NERGYNERGY NERGYNERGY C hapter

[Page 2]
SCIENCE114 Activity 10.3 • Think of situations when the object is not displaced in spite of a force acting on it. • Also think of situations when an object gets displaced in the absence of a force acting on it. • List all the situations that you can think of for each. • Discuss with your friends whether work is done in these situations. 10.1.3WORK DONE BY A CONSTANT FORCE How is work defined in science? T o understand this, we shall first consider the case when the force is acting in the direction of displacement. Let a constant force, F act on an object. Let the object be displaced through a distance, s in the direction of the force (Fig. 10.1). Let W be the work done. We define work to be equal to the pr oduct of the force and displacement. Work done = force × displacement W = F s (10.1) in day-to-day life. For each of these activities, ask the following questions and answer them: (i) What is the work being done on? (ii) What is happening to the object? (iii) Who (what) is doing the work? 10.1.2SCIENTIFIC CONCEPTION OF WORK To understand the way we view work and define work from the point of view of science, let us consider some situations: Push a pebble lying on a sur face. The pebble moves through a distance. You exerted a force on the pebble and the pebble got displaced. In this situation work is done. A girl pulls a trolley and the trolley moves through a distance. The girl has exerted a force on the trolley and it is displaced. Therefore, work is done. Lift a book thr ough a height. T o do this you must apply a force. The book rises up. There is a force applied on the book and the book has moved. Hence, work is done. A closer look at the above situations reveals that two conditions need to be satisfied for work to be done: (i) a force should act on an object, and (ii) the object must be displaced. If any one of the above conditions does not exist, work is not done. This is the way we view work in science. A bullock is pulling a cart. The cart moves. There is a force on the cart and the cart has moved. Do you think that work is done in this situation? Activity 10.2 • Think of some situations from your daily life involving work. • List them. • Discuss with your friends whether work is being done in each situation. • Try to reason out your response. • If work is done, which is the force acting on the object? • What is the object on which the work is done? • What happens to the object on which work is done? Fig. 10.1 Thus, work done by a force acting on an object is equal to the magnitude of the force multiplied by the distance moved in the dir ection of the force. W ork has only magnitude and no direction. In Eq. (10.1), if F = 1 N and s = 1 m then the work done by the force will be 1 N m. Here the unit of work is newton metre (N m) or joule (J). Thus 1 J is the amount of work

[Page 3]
WORK AND ENERGY 115 done on an object when a force of 1 N displaces it by 1 m along the line of action of the force. Look at Eq. (10.1) carefully. What is the work done when the force on the object is zero? What would be the work done when the displacement of the object is zero? Refer to the conditions that ar e to be satisfied to say that work is done. Example 10.1 A force of 5 N is acting on an object. The object is displaced through 2 m in the direction of the force (Fig. 10.2). If the force acts on the object all through the displacement, then work done is 5 N × 2 m =10 N m or 10 J. Fig. 10.4 Consider a situation in which an object is moving with a uniform velocity along a particular direction. Now a retarding force, F, is applied in the opposite direction. That is, the angle between the two directions is 180º. Let the object stop after a displacement s. In such a situation, the work done by the force, F is taken as negative and denoted by the minus sign. The work done by the force is F × (–s) or (–F × s). It is clear from the above discussion that the work done by a force can be either positive or negative. To understand this, let us do the following activity: Activity 10.4 • Lift an object up. Work is done by the force exerted by you on the object. The object moves upwar ds. The force you exerted is in the dir ection of displacement. However , ther e is the force of gravity acting on the object. • Which one of these forces is doing positive work? • Which one is doing negative work? • Give reasons. Work done is negative when the force acts opposite to the dir ection of displacement. Work done is positive when the force is in the direction of displacement. Example 10.2 A porter lifts a luggage of 15 kg from the ground and puts it on his head 1.5 m above the ground. Calculate the work done by him on the luggage. Solution: Mass of luggage, m = 15 kg and displacement, s = 1.5 m. Fig. 10.2 uestion 1. A force of 7 N acts on an object. The displacement is, say 8 m, in the dir ection of the force (Fig. 10.3). Let us take it that the force acts on the object through the displacement. What is the work done in this case? Fig. 10.3 Consider another situation in which the force and the displacement are in the same direction: a baby pulling a toy car parallel to the ground, as shown in Fig. 10.4. The baby has exerted a force in the dir ection of displacement of the car. In this situation, the work done will be equal to the product of the force and displacement. In such situations, the work done by the force is taken as positive. Q

[Page 4]
SCIENCE116 raised hammer falls on a nail placed on a piece of wood, it drives the nail into the wood. We have also observed children winding a toy (such as a toy car) and when the toy is placed on the floor, it starts moving. When a balloon is filled with air and we press it we notice a change in its shape. As long as we press it gently, it can come back to its original shape when the force is withdrawn. However, if we press the balloon hard, it can even explode producing a blasting sound. In all these examples, the objects acquire, through different means, the capability of doing work. An object having a capability to do work is said to possess energy. The object which does the work loses energy and the object on which the work is done gains energy. How does an object with energy do work? An object that possesses energy can exert a force on another object. When this happens, energy is transferred from the former to the latter. The second object may move as it receives energy and therefore do some work. Thus, the first object had a capacity to do work. This implies that any object that possesses energy can do work. The energy possessed by an object is thus measured in terms of its capacity of doing work. The unit of energy is, therefore, the same as that of work, that is, joule (J). 1 J is the ener gy r equir ed to do 1 joule of work. Sometimes a larger unit of energy called kilo joule (kJ) is used. 1 kJ equals 1000 J. 10.2.1FORMS OF ENERGY Luckily the world we live in provides energy in many different forms. The various forms include mechanical energy (potential energy + kinetic ener gy), heat ener gy, chemical energy, electrical energy and light energy. Think it over ! How do you know that some entity is a form of energy? Discuss with your friends and teachers. Work done, W = F × s = mg × s = 15 kg × 10 m s-2 × 1.5 m = 225 kg m s-2 m = 225 N m = 225 J Work done is 225 J. uestions 1. When do we say that work is done? 2. Write an expression for the work done when a force is acting on an object in the direction of its displacement. 3. Define 1 J of work. 4. A pair of bullocks exerts a force of 140 N on a plough. The field being ploughed is 15 m long. How much work is done in ploughing the length of the field? 10.2Energy Life is impossible without energy. The demand for energy is ever incr easing. Where do we get ener gy fr om? The Sun is the biggest natural source of energy to us. Many of our energy sources are derived from the Sun. We can also get energy from the nuclei of atoms, the interior of the earth, and the tides. Can you think of other sources of energy? Activity 10.5 • A few sources of energy are listed above. There are many other sources of energy. List them. • Discuss in small gr oups how certain sources of energy are due to the Sun. • Are there sources of energy which are not due to the Sun? The word energy is very often used in our daily life, but in science we give it a definite and pr ecise meaning. Let us consider the following examples: when a fast moving cricket ball hits a stationary wicket, the wicket is thr own away. Similarly, an object when raised to a certain height gets the capability to do work. You must have seen that when a Q