[Page 1]
As we look at our surroundings, we see a large variety of things with different shapes, sizes and textures. Everything in this universe is made up of material which scientists have named “matter”. The air we br eathe, the food we eat, stones, clouds, stars, plants and animals, even a small dr op of water or a particle of sand — every thing is matter. We can also see as we look around that all the things mentioned above occupy space and have mass. In other words, they have both mass* and volume**. Since early times, human beings have been trying to understand their surroundings. Early Indian philosophers classified matter in the form of five basic elements — the “Panch Tatva” — air , earth, fir e, sky and water . According to them everything, living or non- living, was made up of these five basic elements. Ancient Gr eek philosophers had arrived at a similar classification of matter. Modern day scientists have evolved two types of classification of matter based on their physical properties and chemical nature. In this chapter we shall lear n about matter based on its physical pr operties. Chemical aspects of matter will be taken up in subsequent chapters. 1.1 Physical Nature of Matter 1.1.1 MATTER IS MADE UP OF PARTICLES For a long time, two schools of thought prevailed regarding the natur e of matter . One school believed matter to be continuous like a block of wood, whereas, the other thought that matter was made up of particles like sand. Let us perform an activity to decide about the nature of matter — is it continuous or particulate? Activity ______________ 1.1 • Take a 100 mL beaker . • Fill half the beaker with water and mark the level of water. • Dissolve some salt/ sugar with the help of a glass rod. • Observe any change in water level. • What do you think has happened to the salt? • Where does it disappear? • Does the level of water change? In or der to answer these questions we need to use the idea that matter is made up of particles. What was there in the spoon, salt or sugar, has now spread throughout water. This is illustrated in Fig. 1.1. 1.1.2 HOW SMALL ARE THESE PARTICLES OF MATTER? Activity ______________ 1.2 • Take 2–3 crystals of potassium permanganate and dissolve them in 100 mL of water. Fig. 1.1: When we dissolve salt in water, the particles of salt get into the spaces between particles of water. * The SI unit of mass is kilogram (kg). ** The SI unit of volume is cubic metr e (m3). The common unit of measuring volume is litre (L) such that 1L = 1 dm 3, 1L = 1000 mL, 1 mL = 1 cm 3. 1 M MMMMATTER ATTERATTER ATTERATTER IN ININ ININ O O O O OUR URUR URUR S S S S SURROUNDINGSURROUNDINGSURROUNDINGSURROUNDINGSURROUNDINGS C hapter Reprint 2025-26
ie: hapter oats tn MATTER IN OuR SURROUNDINGS As we look at our surroundings, we see a large Activity 1.1 variety of things with different shapes, sizes . and textures. Everything in this universe is ¢ Take a 100 ml. beaker. made up of material which scientists have * Fill half the heaker with water and named “matter”. The air we breathe, the food mark the level ot water. . . Iissolve some salt/ sugar with the help we eat. stones, clouds, stars, plants and of a plass rod. animals, even a small drop of water or a * Observe any change in water level. particle of sand — every thing is matter. We * What do you think has happened to can also see as we look around that all the the salt? — things mentioned above occupy space and ¢ — Where does it disappear? have mass. In other words, they have both ¢ Does the level of water change? mass* and volume**. In order to answer these questions we Since early times, human beings have peed to use the idea that matter is made up been trying to understand their surroundings. or particles. What was there in the spoon, salt Early Indian philosophers classified matter in orst igar, has now spread throughout water. the form of five basic elements — the “Panch This is illustrated in Fis. 1.1 Tatva” — air, earth, fire. sky and water. . According to them everything, living or non- living. was made up of these five basic N elements. Ancient Greek philosophers had got “= Q..., Sx rey arrived at a similar classification of matter. ) | i ~ \ ~ Modern day scientists have evolved two Water —— Water \ a Water types of classification of matter based on their a, Adasale | 2 su” Sw Sal physical properties and chemical nature. Particles ofwater Salt ~~ In this chapter we shall learn about magnified millions matter based on its physical properties. ; Chemical aspects of matter will be taken up in subsequent chapters. Fig. 1.1: When we dissolve salt in water, the particles . of salt get into the spaces between particles 1.1 Physical Nature of Matter of water ’ ’ 1.1.1 MATTER IS MADE UP OF PARTICLES 1.1.2 How SMALL ARE THESE PARTICLES For a long time. two schools of thought prevailed . aereR D> regarding the nature of matter. One school OF MATTER? believed matter to be continuous like a block Activity 1.2 of wood, whereas, the other thought that matter ctivity ° was made up of particles like sand. Let us ¢ ‘Take 2-3 crystals of potassium perform an activity to decide about the nature permanganate and dissolve them in of matter — is it continuous or particulate? 100 ml. of water. ** The SI unit of volume is cubie metre (mm). The common unit of measuring volume is litre (L) such that IL - dm’, 1b - 1000 mL. 1 mL. = 1 erm?*. Reprint 2025 26

[Page 2]
SCIENCE2 • Take out approximately 10 mL of this solution and put it into 90 mL of clear water. • Take out 10 mL of this solution and put it into another 90 mL of clear water. • Keep diluting the solution like this 5 to 8 times. • Is the water still coloured ? 1.2.2 PARTICLES OF MATTER ARE CONTINUOUSLY MOVING Activity Activity Activity Activity Activity 1.3 1.31.3 1.31.3 • Put an unlit incense stick in a corner of your class. How close do you have to go near it so as to get its smell? • Now light the incense stick. What happens? Do you get the smell sitting at a distance? • Record your observations. Activity Activity Activity Activity Activity 1.4 1.41.4 1.41.4 • Take two glasses/beakers filled with water. • Put a dr op of blue or r ed ink slowly and carefully along the sides of the first beaker and honey in the same way in the second beaker. • Leave them undisturbed in your house or in a corner of the class. • Record your observations. • What do you observe immediately after adding the ink drop? • What do you observe immediately after adding a drop of honey? • How many hours or days does it take for the colour of ink to spr ead evenly throughout the water? Activity Activity Activity Activity Activity 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 • Drop a crystal of copper sulphate or potassium permanganate into a glass of hot water and another containing cold water. Do not stir the solution. Allow the crystals to settle at the bottom. • What do you observe just above the solid crystal in the glass? • What happens as time passes? • What does this suggest about the particles of solid and liquid? • Does the rate of mixing change with temperature? Why and how? From the above three activities (1.3, 1.4 and 1.5), we can conclude the following: Fig. 1.2: Estimating how small ar e the particles of matter. With every dilution, though the colour becomes light, it is still visible. This experiment shows that just a few crystals of potassium per manganate can colour a lar ge volume of water (about 1000 L). So we conclude that there must be millions of tiny particles in just one crystal of potassium permanganate, which keep on dividing themselves into smaller and smaller particles. The same activity can be done using 2 mL of Dettol instead of potassium permanganate. The smell can be detected even on repeated dilution. The particles of matter are very small – they are small beyond our imagination!!!! 1.2 Characteristics of Particles of Matter 1.2.1 PARTICLES OF MATTER HAVE SPACE BETWEEN THEM In activities 1.1 and 1.2 we saw that particles of sugar , salt, Dettol, or potassium permanganate got evenly distributed in water. Similarly, when we make tea, cof fee or lemonade (nimbu paani ), particles of one type of matter get into the spaces between particles of the other. This shows that ther e is enough space between particles of matter. Reprint 2025-26
¢ Take out approximately 10 mL of this 1.2.2 PARTICLES OF MATTER ARE solution and put it into 90 m1. of clear water, CONTINLOUSLY MOVING ° Take out 10 mL. of this solution and ut it into another 90 mL of clear water. oe ° Keep diluting the solution like this 5 to Activity TT 4.3 8 times, ° Is the water still coloured ? ° Put an unlit incense stick in a corner of your class. How close do you have to go near it so as to pet its smell’? Fpomt — Fpomb — 10 ml. ° Now light the incense stick. What i ~ happens? Do you get the smell sitting —<f | [ | [" Pr] at a distance? <Q LIP Chie Lie <n ie ey ¢ ~~ Record your observations. vom) fowas, lnm, son) wal Aletivity tg . Take two plasses/beakers filled with Fig. 1.2: Estimating how small are the particles of water, Malte. With every dilution though the colour e Put a drop of blue or red ink slowly becomes light, it is sdll visible. . ye . and carefully along the sides of the first heaker and honey in the same way in This experiment shows that just a few the second beaker. crystals of potassium permanganate can . Leave them undisturbed in your house colour a large volume of water (about or in a corner of the class. 1000 L}. So we conclude that there must be . Record your observations. millions of tiny particles in just one crystal ¢ = What do you observe immediately after of potassium permanganate, which keep adding the ink drop? on dividing themselves into smaller and ¢ What do you observe immediately after smaller particles. adding a drop of honey? The same activity can be done using 2 mL. ¢ How many hours or days does it take of Dettol instead of potassium permanganate. for the colour of ink to spread evenly The smell can be detected even on throughout the water? repeated dilution. they are small beyond our imagination!!! ° Drop a crystal of copper sulphate or 12 Characteristics of Particles of potassium permanganate into a glass of hot water and another containing Matter cold water. Do not stir the solution. Allow the erystals to settle at the 1.2.1 PARTICLES OF MATTER HAVE SPACE bottom. . BETWEEN THEM e What do you observe just above the solid crystal in the glass? In activities 1.1 and 1.2 we saw that particles * What happens as time passes? of sugar, salt, Dettol, or potassium . What does this suggest about the permanganate got evenly distributed in water. particles of solid and. liquid? Similarly, when we make tea. coffee or * Does the rate of mixing change with lemonade (nimbu paani), particles of one type temperature? Why and how? of matter get into the spaces between particles . So . of the other. This shows that there is enough From the above three activities (1.3, 1.4 and space between particles of matter. 1.5), we can conclude the following: 2 Scieack : Reprint 2025 26

[Page 3]
MATTER IN O UR S URROUNDING S 3 • If we consider each student as a particle of matter, then in which group the particles held each other with the maximum force? Activity ______________ 1.7 • Take an iron nail, a piece of chalk and a rubber band. • Try breaking them by hammering, cutting or stretching. • In which of the above three substances do you think the particles are held together with greater force? Activity ______________ 1.8 • Take some water in a container , try cutting the surface of water with your fingers. • Were you able to cut the sur face of water? • What could be the reason behind the surface of water remaining together? The above three activities (1.6, 1.7 and 1.8) suggest that particles of matter have force acting between them. This force keeps the particles together. The strength of this force of attraction varies from one kind of matter to another. uestions 1. Which of the following are matter? Chair , air , love, smell, hate, almonds, thought, cold, lemon water, smell of perfume. 2. Give reasons for the following observation: The smell of hot sizzling food reaches you several metres away, but to get the smell from cold food you have to go close. 3. A diver is able to cut through water in a swimming pool. Which property of matter does this observation show? 4. What are the characteristics of the particles of matter? Particles of matter are continuously moving, that is, they possess what we call the kinetic energy. As the temperature rises, particles move faster. So, we can say that with increase in temperature the kinetic energy of the particles also increases. In the above thr ee activities we observe that particles of matter intermix on their own with each other. They do so by getting into the spaces between the particles. This intermixing of particles of two different types of matter on their own is called diffusion. We also observe that on heating, dif fusion becomes faster. Why does this happen? 1.2.3 PARTICLES OF MATTER ATTRACT EACH OTHER Activity ______________ 1.6 • Play this game in the field— make four groups and for m human chains as suggested: • The first group should hold each other from the back and lock arms like Idu-Mishmi dancers (Fig. 1.3). Fig. 1.3 • The second group should hold hands to form a human chain. • The third gr oup should for m a chain by touching each other with only their finger tips. • Now, the fourth gr oup of students should run around and try to break the three human chains one by one into as many small groups as possible. • Which group was the easiest to break? Why? Q Reprint 2025-26
Particles of matter are continuously «If we consider cach student as a moving, that is, they possess what we call particle of matter, then in which group the Kinetic energy. As the temperature rises. the part icles held each other with the particles move faster. So, we can say that with maximum force? increase in temperature the kinetic energy of lo - the particles also increases. Activity 1.7 In the above three activities we observe os - z . that particles of matter intermi their . Take an iron nail, a piece of chalk and at particles o} ma er intermix on their own a rubber band. with each other. They do so by getting into ¢ Try breaking them by hammering, the spaces between the particles, This cutting or stretching. intermixing of particles of two different types . In which of the above three of matter on their own is called diffusion. We substances do you think the particles also observe that on heating, diffusion are held together with greater force? becomes faster. Why does this happen? aan 5 Activity _ 1.8 1.2.3 PARTICLES OF MATTER ATTRACT on seg ee . Take some water in a container, try EACH OTHER cutting the surface of water with your fingers. Activity 1.6 ¢ Were you able to cut the surface of . water? ° Play this game in the field— make four ° What could be the reason behind the groups and form human chains as surface of water remaining together? supeested: on . . The first group should hold each The above three activities (1.6. 1.7 and 1.8) other from the back and lock arms suggest that particles of matter have force like Idu-Mishmi dancers (Fig. 1.3). acting between them. This force keeps the particles together. The strength of this force of attraction varies from one kind of matter to ~~ 0 Oe ‘e 2 another. S § Ms. Bhd eS os als oi we MM , Hestions : ye 7 a . | by ‘ ‘ , ‘ . : pS t | 44 1 Which of the following are ed y fH wo 3 i , syed ThA Tm feat Been ve mMatlter? eer We Sh o Pes a (eras Chair. air. love, smichl. hate aM YE Joe vaste | almonds. thought, cold, lenin ° ww Water, smell of pertiane. rig. 1.3 2. Give reasons for the tollowing observation: ¢ The second group should hold hands Phe smicil of hot sizaling food to form a human chain. reaches vou several metres . The third group should form a chain awa. bat to get the smell from by touching each other with only their cold food vou have to go close. finger ips. OA diver is able ta cut dirough . Now, the fourth group of students Water ina swimming pool. Which should run around and try to break the property of matter docs this three human chains one hy one into “. oy * nc observation show? as many small groups as possible. Vv, the . spetigns nf’ ¢ Which group was the easiest to break? A What cue Fc charac teristics ot Why? the particics of matter? Marten iw Otk Strrotxpixncs 3 Reprint 2025 26

[Page 4]
SCIENCE4 1.3 States of Matter Observe different types of matter around you. What are its different states? We can see that matter ar ound us exists in thr ee dif ferent states– solid, liquid and gas. These states of matter arise due to the variation in the characteristics of the particles of matter. Now, let us study about the properties of these three states of matter in detail. 1.3.1 THE SOLID STATE Activity _____________ 1.9 • Collect the following articles — a pen, a book, a needle and a piece of wooden stick. • Sketch the shape of the above articles in your notebook by moving a pencil around them. • Do all these have a definite shape, distinct boundaries and a fixed volume? • What happens if they are hammered, pulled or dropped? • Are these capable of diffusing into each other? • Try compr essing them by applying force. Are you able to compress them? All the above ar e examples of solids. W e can observe that all these have a definite shape, distinct boundaries and fixed volumes, that is, have negligible compressibility. Solids have a tendency to maintain their shape when subjected to outside force. Solids may break under force but it is difficult to change their shape, so they are rigid. Consider the following: (a) What about a rubber band, can it change its shape on stretching? Is it a solid? (b) What about sugar and salt? When kept in different jars these take the shape of the jar. Are they solid? (c) What about a sponge? It is a solid yet we are able to compr ess it. Why? All the above are solids as: • A rubber band changes shape under force and regains the same shape when the force is removed. If excessive force is applied, it breaks. • The shape of each individual sugar or salt crystal r emains fixed, whether we take it in our hand, put it in a plate or in a jar. • A sponge has minute holes, in which air is trapped, when we press it, the air is expelled out and we ar e able to compress it. 1.3.2 THE LIQUID STATE Activity _____________1.10 • Collect the following: (a) water, cooking oil, milk, juice, a cold drink. (b) containers of different shapes. Put a 50 mL mark on these containers using a measuring cylinder fr om the laboratory. • What will happen if these liquids ar e spilt on the floor? • Measure 50 mL of any one liquid and transfer it into different containers one by one. Does the volume r emain the same? • Does the shape of the liquid remain the same ? • When you pour the liquid fr om one container into another , does it flow easily? We observe that liquids have no fixed shape but have a fixed volume. They take up the shape of the container in which they are kept. Liquids flow and change shape, so they are not rigid but can be called fluid. Refer to activities 1.4 and 1.5 wher e we saw that solids and liquids can dif fuse into liquids. The gases fr om the atmosphere diffuse and dissolve in water . These gases, especially oxygen and carbon dioxide, ar e essential for the survival of aquatic animals and plants. All living cr eatures need to br eathe for survival. The aquatic animals can br eathe under water due to the presence of dissolved oxygen in water. Thus, we may conclude that solids, liquids and gases can diffuse into liquids. The rate of diffusion of liquids is Reprint 2025-26
1.3 States of Matter the force is removed. If excessive force is applied, it breaks. Observe different types of matter around you. ° The shape of each individual sugar or What are its different states’? We can see that salt crystal remains fixed, whether we matter around us exists in three different take it in our hand, put it in a plate or in states- solid. liquid and gas. These states of a jar. matter arise due to the variation in the ¢ A sponge has minute holes, in which characteristics of the particles of matter. air is trapped, when we press it, the air Now, let us study about the properties of is expelled out and we are able to these three states of matter in detail. compress it. 1.3.1 THE SOLID STATE 1.3.2 THE LIQUID STATE Activity 1.9 Activity 1.10 . Collect the following articles — a pen, . Collect the following: a book, a needle and a piece of wooden {a} water, cooking oil. milk, juice, a stick. cold drink. . Sketch the shape of the above articles (b) containers of different shapes. Put in your notebook by moving a pencil a 50 ml. mark on these containers around them. using a measuring cylinder from * [Do all these have a definite shape. the laboratory. distinct boundaries and a fixed volume? ¢ What will happen if these liquids are ¢ What happens if they are hammered. spilt on the floor? pulled or dropped? ° Measure 50 ml. of any one hquid and . Are these capable of diffusing into each transfer it into different containers one other? hy one. Does the volume remain the oT ; same's . t ry compressii® them by applying . Does the shape of the liquid remain the ‘oree, Are you able to compress them? same ? All the above are examples of solids. We ¢ When you pour the liquid from one can observe that all these have a definite container into another, does it Now shape, distinct boundaries and fixed volumes, easily? that is, have negligible compressibility. Solids We observe that liquids have no fixed have a tendency to maintain their shape when — shape but have a fixed volume. They take up subjected to outside force. Solids may break the shape of the container in which they are under force but it is difficult to change their — kept. Liquids flow and change shape. so they shape. so they are rigid. are not rigid but can be called fluid. Consider the following: Refer to activities 1.4 and 1.5 where we i a saw that solids and liquids can diffuse into (a) What about a rubber band, can it liquids. The gases from the atmosphere change its shape on stretching? Is it diffuse and dissolve in water. These gases, a solid’? especially oxygen and carbon dioxide, are (b) What about sugar and salt? When — essential for the survival of aquatic animals kept in different jars these take the — and plants. shape of the jar. Are they solid? All living creatures need to breathe for {c) What about a sponge? It is a solid survival, The aquatic animals can breathe yet we are able to compress it. Why? under water due to the presence of dissolved All the above are solids as: oxygen in water. Thus, we may conclude that * Arubber band changes shape under solids, liquids and gases can diffuse into force and regains the same shape when liquids. The rate of diffusion of liquids is 4 Scmxer : Reprint 2025 26

[Page 5]
MATTER IN O UR S URROUNDING S 5 higher than that of solids. This is due to the fact that in the liquid state, particles move freely and have greater space between each other as compared to particles in the solid state. 1.3.3 THE GASEOUS STATE Have you ever observed a balloon seller filling a lar ge number of balloons fr om a single cylinder of gas? Enquire from him how many balloons is he able to fill fr om one cylinder. Ask him which gas does he have in the cylinder. Activity _____________1.11 • Take three 100 mL syringes and close their nozzles by rubber corks, as shown in Fig.1.4. • Remove the pistons fr om all the syringes. • Leaving one syringe untouched, fill water in the second and pieces of chalk in the third. • Insert the pistons back into the syringes. You may apply some vaseline on the pistons befor e inserting them into the syringes for their smooth movement. • Now, try to compr ess the content by pushing the piston in each syringe. We have observed that gases ar e highly compr essible as compared to solids and liquids. The liquefied petr oleum gas (LPG) cylinder that we get in our home for cooking or the oxygen supplied to hospitals in cylinders is compr essed gas. Compr essed natural gas (CNG) is used as fuel these days in vehicles. Due to its high compr essibility, large volumes of a gas can be compr essed into a small cylinder and transported easily. We come to know of what is being cooked in the kitchen without even entering ther e, by the smell that r eaches our nostrils. How does this smell reach us? The particles of the aroma of food mix with the particles of air spread from the kitchen, reach us and even farther away. The smell of hot cooked food reaches us in seconds; compare this with the rate of diffusion of solids and liquids. Due to high speed of particles and lar ge space between them, gases show the pr operty of diffusing very fast into other gases. In the gaseous state, the particles move about randomly at high speed. Due to this random movement, the particles hit each other and also the walls of the container. The pressure exerted by the gas is because of this force exerted by gas particles per unit ar ea on the walls of the container. Fig. 1.4 • What do you observe? In which case was the piston easily pushed in? • What do you infer fr om your observations? Fig.1.5: a, b and c show the magnified schematic pictures of the thr ee states of matter . The motion of the particles can be seen and compared in the three states of matter. Reprint 2025-26
higher than that of solids. This is due to the We have observed that gases are highly fact that in the liquid state. particles move compressible as compared to solids and freely and have greater space between each — liquids. The liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) other as compared to particles in the solid cylinder that we get in our home for cooking state. or the oxygen supplied to hospitals in cylinders is compressed gas. Compressed 1.3.3 THE GASEOUS STATE natural gas (CNG) is used as fuel these days in vehicles. Due to its high compressibility, Have you ever observed a balloon seller filling — large volumes of a gas can be compressed a large number of balloons from a single — into a small cylinder and transported easily. cylinder of gas? Enquire from him how many We come to know of what is being cooked balloons is he able to fill from one cylinder. — in the kitchen without even entering there, Ask him which gas does he have in the cylinder. by the smell that reaches our nostrils. How . does this smell reach us? The particles of the Activity 1.11 aroma of food mix with the particles of air Take tt 100 mi | hel spread from the kitchen, reach us and even ake three mie syringes and close farther away. The smell of hot cooked food their nozzles by rubber corks, as . to ger a reaches us in seconds; compare this with the shown in Fig. 1.4. : * Remove the pistons from all the rate of diffusion of solids and liquids. Due to syringes. high speed of particles and large space . Leaving one syringe untouched, fill between them. gases show the property of water in the second and pieces of chalk diffusing very fast into other gases. in the third. In the gaseous state, the particles move ¢ Insert the pistons back into the about randomly at high speed. Due to this syringes. You may apply some vaseline random movement, the particles hit each on the Pistons hetore merlin them other and also the walls of the container. The into the syringes for (heir smoot pressure exerted by the gas is because of this movement. « force exerted by gas particles per unit area . Now, try to compress the content by he walls of the container pushing the piston in each syringe. on the walls of the container, aodteee er Soehess 4 Piston =—= Settese Solid soettese P2222225 <> ‘ fe A a) Cy * Liquid (bl Gas R (ruber cork Oa wee ay ( Fig. 1.4 Gas . What do you observe? In which case Pig. 1.5: ab and ¢ show the magnified schematic was the piston easily pushed in? pictures of the three states of matier, The . What do you infer from vour motion of the particles can be seen and observations? conipared in the three states of walter. Marten in Oon StRROO SINGS 5 Reprint 2025 26

[Page 6]
SCIENCE6 1.4.1 EFFECT OF CHANGE OF TEMPERATURE Activity _____________1.12 • Take about 150 g of ice in a beaker and suspend a laboratory thermometer so that its bulb is in contact with the ice, as in Fig. 1.6. uestions 1. The mass per unit volume of a substance is called density. (density = mass/volume). Arrange the following in order of increasing density – air, exhaust from chimneys, honey, water , chalk, cotton and iron. 2. (a) Tabulate the dif ferences in the characterisitcs of states of matter. (b) Comment upon the following: rigidity, compr essibility, fluidity, filling a gas container , shape, kinetic energy and density. 3. Give reasons (a) A gas fills completely the vessel in which it is kept. (b) A gas exerts pressure on the walls of the container. (c) A wooden table should be called a solid. (d) We can easily move our hand in air but to do the same through a solid block of wood we need a karate expert. 4. Liquids generally have lower density as compar ed to solids. But you must have observed that ice floats on water. Find out why. 1.4 Can Matter Change its State? We all know from our observation that water can exist in three states of matter– • solid, as ice, • liquid, as the familiar water, and • gas, as water vapour. What happens inside the matter during this change of state? What happens to the particles of matter during the change of states? How does this change of state take place? We need answers to these questions, isn’t it? Q (a) (b) Fig. 1.6: (a) Conversion of ice to water, (b) conversion of water to water vapour Reprint 2025-26
(i westions 1.4.1 EeFECT OF CHANGE OF TEMPERATURE | 1 i mass pe r tant volunic of a Activity 1.12 substance is called density. TTT {density - nraiss/voluime). ¢ Take about 150 g of ice in a beaker and | Arrange the tollowing in order of suspend a laboratory thermometer so UJ increasing density - air, exhaust that us bulb is in contact with the ice, from chininevs, honev. water. asin Fig, 1.6. chalk. cotton and iron, 2 fa) Tabulate the ditfercnecs in the charactcrisites of states of niatter. Iron. (bh) Comment upon the following: stand . [ Thermometer rigidity. compressibility. Ont jase p— Glass stirrer Quidit. filling a gas i container, shape, kinctic i] encr)ev and density. —} 3 Give reasons Beaker fa) A gas fills completely the lee vessel in which itis kept. es (bh) A gas exerts pressure on the i Walls of Che container. TS Burner fe) A wooden table should be ’ called a solid. Cs fd) Weean casilv move our hand 7 in-air but to do the same fa) through a solid block of wood we need a karate cxpert. 4. Liquids generally have lowcr | density as comparcd ta solids. Iron: . ; But vou must have observed Chait stand | {. Thermometer ice Moats on water. Find out why. OY [Izs=+ J Glass stirrer 14 Can Matter Change its State? — Beaker We all know from our observation that water wii Water can exist in three states of matter- ‘ = . solid, as ice. a © — hqunid, as the familiar water, and 3 Burner * gas, as water vapour. What happens inside the matter during a this change of state? What happens to the particles of matter during the change of Oo} states? How does this change of state take place? We need answers to these questions, Fig. 1.6: (a) Conversion of ice to water, (b] conversion isn’t it? of water fo water vapour 6 Science. : Reprint 2025 26

[Page 7]
MATTER IN O UR S URROUNDING S 7 • Start heating the beaker on a low flame. • Note the temperature when the ice starts melting. • Note the temperature when all the ice has converted into water. • Recor d your observations for this conversion of solid to liquid state. • Now, put a glass rod in the beaker and heat while stirring till the water starts boiling. • Keep a careful eye on the thermometer reading till most of the water has vaporised. • Recor d your observations for the conversion of water in the liquid state to the gaseous state. On increasing the temperature of solids, the kinetic energy of the particles increases. Due to the incr ease in kinetic ener gy, the particles start vibrating with gr eater speed. The energy supplied by heat overcomes the forces of attraction between the particles. The particles leave their fixed positions and start moving more freely. A stage is reached when the solid melts and is converted to a liquid. The minimum temperature at which a solid melts to become a liquid at the atmospheric pressure is called its melting point. The melting point of a solid is an indication of the strength of the force of attraction between its particles. The melting point of ice is 273.15 K*. The process of melting, that is, change of solid state into liquid state is also known as fusion. When a solid melts, its temperature remains the same, so where does the heat energy go? You must have observed, during the experiment of melting, that the temperature of the system does not change after the melting point is reached, till all the ice melts. This happens even though we continue to heat the beaker, that is, we continue to supply heat. This heat gets used up in changing the state by overcoming the forces of attraction between the particles. As this heat energy is absorbed by ice without showing any rise in temperatur e, it is consider ed that it gets hidden into the contents of the beaker and is known as the latent heat. The wor d latent means hidden. The amount of heat ener gy that is required to change 1 kg of a solid into liquid at atmospheric pressure at its melting point is known as the latent heat of fusion. So, particles in water at 0oC (273 K) have more energy as compared to particles in ice at the same temperature. When we supply heat ener gy to water , particles start moving even faster. At a certain temperature, a point is r eached when the particles have enough energy to break fr ee from the forces of attraction of each other. At this temperature the liquid starts changing into gas. The temperature at which a liquid starts boiling at the atmospheric pressure is known as its boiling point. Boiling is a bulk phenomenon. Particles from the bulk of the liquid gain enough energy to change into the vapour state. For water this temperature is 373 K (100oC = 273 + 100 = 373 K). Can you define the latent heat of vaporisation? Do it in the same way as we have defined the latent heat of fusion. Particles in steam, that is, water vapour at 373 K (1000 C) have more energy than water at the same temperatur e. This is because particles in steam have absorbed extra energy in the form of latent heat of vaporisation. *Note: Kelvin is the SI unit of temperature, 0o C =273.15 K. For convenience, we take 0o C = 273 K after rounding off the decimal. To change a temperature on the Kelvin scale to the Celsius scale you have to subtract 273 from the given temperature, and to convert a temperature on the Celsius scale to the Kelvin scale you have to add 273 to the given temperature. So, we infer that the state of matter can be changed into another state by changing the temperature. We have lear nt that substances ar ound us change state from solid to liquid and from liquid to gas on application of heat. But there Reprint 2025-26
¢ — Start heating the beaker on a low flame. state by overcoming the forces of attraction ¢ Note the temperature when the ice between the particles. As this heat energy is starts melting. absorbed by ice without showing any rise in ¢ Note the temperature when all the ice temperature, it is considered that it gets has converted into water. hidden into the contents of the beaker and is ¢ Record your observations for this known as the latent heat. The word latent conversion of solid to liquid state. means hidden. The amount of heat energy * Now, puta glass red in the heaker and that is required to change 1 kg of a solid into heat while stirring ull the water starts liquid at atmospheric pressure at its melting ° Keep a earetul eve on the thermometer point is Known as the latent heat of fusion. ae - : Sage P So, particles in water at 0°C (273 K) have more reading till most of the water has vaporised. energy as compared to particles in ice at the . Record your observations for the same temperature, conversion of water in the liquid state When we supply heat energy to water, to the gaseous state. particles start moving even faster. At a certain temperature, a point is reached when the On increasing the temperature of solids. — particles have enough energy to break free the kinetic energy of the particles increases. from the forces of attraction of each other. At Due to the increase in kinetic energy, the — this temperature the liquid starts changing particles start vibrating with greater speed. — into gas. The temperature at which a liquid The energy supplied by heat overcomes the — starts boiling at the atmospheric pressure is forces of attraction between the particles. The — Known as its boiling point. Boiling is a bulk particles leave their fixed positions and start Phenomenon. Particles from the bulk of the moving more freely. A stage is reached when __ liquid gain enough energy to change into the the solid melts and is converted to a liquid, Vapour state. The minimum temperature at which a solid For water this temperature is 373 K melts to become a liquid at the atmospheric (100°C = 273 + 100 = 373 K). pressure is called its melting point. Can you define the latent heat of i vaporisation? Do it in the same way as we The melting point ofa solid is an indication have defined the latent heat of fusion. of the strength of the force of attraction Particles in steam, that is. water vapour at between its particles. 373 K (100°C) have more energy than water at the same temperature. This is because The melting point of ice is 273.15 K*. The particles in steam have absorbed extra energy process of melting, that is, change of solid in the form of latent heat of vaporisation. state into liquid state is also known as fusion. When a solid melts, its temperature Heat Heat remains the same, so where does the heat. _— [Haw State] energy go? Cool Cool You must have observed, during the experiment of melting, that the temperature So, we infer that the state of matter can of the system does not change after the — be changed into another state by changing melting point is reached, till all the ice melts. the temperature. This happens even though we continue to We have learnt that substances around heat the beaker, that is, we continue to supply us change state from solid to liquid and from heat. This heat gets used up in changing the — liquid to gas on application of heat. But there *Note: Kelvin is the SI unit of temperature, OC -273.15 K. For convenience, we take 0° C - 273 K after rounding off the decimal. To change a temperature on the Kelvin scale to the Celsius scale you have to subtract 273 from the given temperature, and to convert a temperature on the Celsius scale to the Kelvin scale vou have to add 273 to the given lemperature. Marten iw Otk Strrotxpixncs 7 Reprint 2025 26 :

[Page 8]
SCIENCE8 enclosed in a cylinder? Will the particles come closer? Do you think that increasing or decreasing the pressure can change the state of matter? are some that change directly from solid state to gaseous state and vice versa without changing into the liquid state. Activity _____________1.13 • Take some camphor. Crush it and put it in a china dish. • Put an inverted funnel over the china dish. • Put a cotton plug on the stem of the funnel, as shown in Fig. 1.7. * atmosphere (atm) is a unit of measuring pressure exerted by a gas. The unit of pressure is Pascal (Pa): 1 atmosphere = 1.01 × 105 Pa. The pressure of air in atmosphere is called atmospheric pressure. The atmospheric pressure at sea level is 1 atmosphere, and is taken as the normal atmospheric pressure. Fig. 1.7: Sublimation of camphor Fig. 1.8: By applying pressure, particles of matter can be brought close together Applying pressure and reducing temperature can liquefy gases. Have you hear d of solid carbon dioxide (CO2)? It is stored under high pressure. Solid CO2 gets converted directly into gaseous state on decr ease of pr essure to 1 atmospher e* without coming into liquid state. This is the reason that solid carbon dioxide is also known as dry ice. Thus, we can say that pr essur e and temperature deter mine the state of a substance, whether it will be solid, liquid or gas. • Now, heat slowly and observe. • What do you infer from the above activity? A change of state directly from solid to gas without changing into liquid state is called sublimation and the direct change of gas to solid without changing into liquid is called deposition. 1.4.2 EFFECT OF CHANGE OF PRESSURE We have already learnt that the difference in various states of matter is due to the dif ference in the distances between the constituent particles. What will happen when we start putting pressure and compress a gas Fig. 1.9: Interconversion of the three states of matter Deposition Reprint 2025-26
are some that change directly from solid state enclosed in a cylinder? Will the particles come lo gaseous state and vice versa without — closer? Do you think that increasing or changing into the liquid state. decreasing the pressure can change the state of matter? Activity 1.13 ¢ ‘Take some camphor. Crush it and put Mieton . Piston Piston it in a china dish. vlinder (vlinder Cyhnder . Put an inverted funnel over the china dish. . Put a cotton plug on the stem of the funnel, as shown in Fig. 1.7. C f —!, ; ‘otton phi | Ca) les Inverted fonnel Camphor mo Camphor , . apours \ f 0 woteitied Pig. 1.8: By applying pressure, particles of matter 4 \ can be brought close together / . \ . y Applying pressure and reducing > See ag China dist temperature van liquefy gases. a Have you heard of solid carbon dioxide | ca (CO,)? It is stored under high pressure. Solid JY , = Burner CO, gets converted directly into gaseous state fi © \ on decrease of pressure to 1 atmosphere“ oe without coming into liquid state. This is the Fig. 1.7: Sublimation of camphor reason that solid carbon dioxide is also known . as dry ice. ° Now, heat slowly and observe. Thus. we can say that pressure and . What do you infer from the above activity? temperature determine the state of a . substance, whether it will be solid. liquid Achange of state directly from solid to gas BAS. without changing into liquid state is called sublimation and the direct change of gas to Liquid ‘ solid without changing into liquid is called S . <n, deposition. S/S ONN, S %, ¢ xs > 1.4.2 EFFECT OF CHANGE OF PRESSURE ° *y Sublimauion We have already learnt that the difference in Solid <2 Gas various states of matter is due to the Deposition difference in the distances between the constituent particles. What will happen when we start putting pressure and compress a gas Fig. 1.9: interconversion of the three states of matter atmosphere {atm is a unit of measuring pressure exerted by a gas. The unit of pressure is Pascal (Pa): 1 atmosphere - 1.01. 10° Pa. The pressure of air in atmosphere is called atmospheric pressure. The atmospheric pressure at sea level is | atmosphere, and is taken as the normal atmospheric pressure. 8 Science. : Reprint 2025 26

[Page 9]
MATTE R IN O UR S URRO UN DING S 9 99 99 • Record the room temperature. • Record the time or days taken for the evaporation process in the above cases. • Repeat the above three steps of activity on a rainy day and record your observations. • What do you infer about the ef fect of temperature, surface area and wind velocity (speed) on evaporation? You must have observed that the rate of evaporation increases with– • an increase of surface area: We know that evaporation is a surface phenomenon. If the surface area is increased, the rate of evaporation increases. For example, while putting clothes for drying up we spread them out. • an increase of temperature: With the increase of temperature, more number of particles get enough kinetic energy to go into the vapour state. • a decrease in humidity: Humidity is the amount of water vapour present in air. The air around us cannot hold more than a definite amount of water vapour at a given temperature. If the amount of water in air is already high, the rate of evaporation decreases. • an increase in wind speed: It is a common observation that clothes dry faster on a windy day . With the increase in wind speed, the particles of water vapour move away with the wind, decreasing the amount of water vapour in the surrounding. 1.5.2 HOW DOES EVAPORATION CAUSE COOLING? In an open vessel, the liquid keeps on evaporating. The particles of liquid absorb energy from the surrounding to regain the energy lost during evaporation. This absorption of energy from the surroundings make the surroundings cold. uestions 1. Convert the following temperature to celsius scale: a. 300 K b. 573 K 2. What is the physical state of water at: a. 250oC b. 100oC ? 3. For any substance, why does the temperature remain constant during the change of state? 4. Suggest a method to liquefy atmospheric gases. 1.5 Evaporation Do we always need to heat or change pressure for changing the state of matter? Can you quote some examples from everyday life where change of state from liquid to vapour takes place without the liquid reaching the boiling point? Water, when left uncovered, slowly changes into vapour. Wet clothes dry up. What happens to water in the above two examples? We know that particles of matter are always moving and are never at rest. At a given temperature in any gas, liquid or solid, there are particles with different amounts of kinetic energy. In the case of liquids, a small fraction of particles at the surface, having higher kinetic energy, is able to break away from the forces of attraction of other particles and gets converted into vapour. This phenomenon of change of liquid into vapours at any temperature below its boiling point is called evaporation. 1.5.1 FACTORS AFFECTING EVAPORATION Let us understand this with an activity. Activity _____________ 1.14 • Take 5 mL of water in a test tube and keep it near a window or under a fan. • Take 5 mL of water in an open china dish and keep it near a window or under a fan. • Take 5 mL of water in an open china dish and keep it inside a cupboard or on a shelf in your class. Q Reprint 2025-26
“ha : Record the room temperature. resth ° F N) ue sl Jus . Record the time or days taken for the ) 2. Convert the folowing evaporation process in the above cases. temperature to celsius scale: ° Repeat the above three steps of activity a, 300K b, 573K on a rainy day and record your | 2. What is the physical state of observations, UJ water at: ¢ = What do you infer about the effect of a. 2506 b. 100°C ? ternperature, surface area and wind 3.) Forany substance, why does the velocity (speed) on evaporation? feniperalure remain constant You must have observed that the rate of during the change of state? . . wo gey . . evaporation increases with— 4. Sugeest a method to liquety . pee see ob vecenes . * an increase of surface area: atmospheric gases. oo, We know that evaporation is a surface . phenomenon. If the surface area is 1.5 Evaporation increased, the rate of evaporation Do we always need to heat or change pressure increases. For example, while putting for changing the state of matter? Can you clothes for drying up we spread ther quote sore examples from everyday life where out. change of state from liquid to vapour takes * — anincrease of temperature: place without the liquid reaching the boiling With the increase of temperature, more point? Water, when left uncovered, slowly number of particles get enough kinetic changes into vapour. wet clothes dry up. wna energy to go into the vapour state. lappens to water in the al yove two exainples? © adecrease in humidity: We know that particles of matter are . o . . Humidity is the arnount of water vapour always moving and are never at rest. At a given : 4 . oe Aaa eds solid fl present in air. The air around us cannot temperature in any gas, liquid or solid, there hold ‘ lefini f are particles with different amounts of kinetic told more than a definite amount o| energy. In the case of liquids, a small fraction water vapour at a given temperature. If of particles at the surface, having higher the amount of water in air is already kinetic energy, is able to break away from the high. the rate of evaporation decreases. forces of attraction of other particles and gets & an increase in wind speed: converted into vapour. This phenomenon of It is a Common observation that clothes change of liquid into vapours at any dry faster on a windy day. With the ternperature below its boiling point is called increase in wind speed, the particles of evaporation. water vapour tnove away with the wind, 1.5.1 FACTORS AFFECTING EVAPORATION decreasing the amount of water vapour in the surrounding. Let us understand this with an activity. Activity iC 1.5.2 How DOES EVAPORATION CAUSE COOLING? . Take 5 ml. of water in a test tube and , keep it near a window or under a fan. In an open vessel, the liquid keeps on ¢ Take 5 mL of water in an open china evaporating, The particles of liquid absorb dish and keep it near a window or nergy from Le seat . under a fan. energy froin the surrounding to regain the ° Take 5 mL of water in an open china energy lost during evaporation. This dish and keep it inside a cupboard or absorption of energy from the surroundings on a shelf in your class. make the surroundings cold. Marren in Ock SURROUNDINGS 9 Reprint 2025 26

[Page 10]
SCIENCE10 What you have learnt • Matter is made up of small particles. • The matter around us exists in three states—solid, liquid and gas. • The forces of attraction between the particles are maximum in solids, intermediate in liquids and minimum in gases. • The spaces in between the constituent particles and kinetic energy of the particles ar e minimum in the case of solids, intermediate in liquids and maximum in gases. What happens when you pour some acetone (nail polish remover) on your palm? The particles gain energy from your palm or surroundings and evaporate causing the palm to feel cool. After a hot sunny day, people sprinkle water on the r oof or open gr ound because the lar ge latent heat of vaporisation of water helps to cool the hot surface. Can you cite some mor e examples fr om daily life where we can feel the effect of cooling due to evaporation? Why should we wear cotton clothes in summer? During summer , we perspir e mor e because of the mechanism of our body which keeps us cool. W e know that during evaporation, the particles at the sur face of the liquid gain energy from the surroundings or body surface and change into vapour. The heat ener gy equal to the latent heat of vaporisation is absorbed fr om the body leaving the body cool. Cotton, being a good absorber of water helps in absorbing the sweat and exposing it to the atmosphere for easy evaporation. Why do we see water droplets on the outer surface of a glass containing ice-cold water? Let us take some ice-cold water in a tumbler. Soon we will see water dr oplets on the outer sur face of the tumbler. The water vapour present in air, on coming in contact with the cold glass of water, loses energy and gets converted to liquid state, which we see as water droplets. uestions 1. Why does a desert cooler cool better on a hot dry day? 2. How does the water kept in an earthen pot (matka) become cool during summer? 3. Why does our palm feel cold when we put some acetone or petrol or perfume on it? 4. Why are we able to sip hot tea or milk faster from a saucer rather than a cup? 5. What type of clothes should we wear in summer? Q Reprint 2025-26
What happens when you pour some Why do we see water droplets on the outer acetone (nail polish remover) on your palm? — surface of a glass containing ice-cold The particles gain energy from your palm or — water? surroundings and evaporate causing the palm Let us take some ice-cold water in a to feel cool. tumbler. Soon we will see water droplets on After a hot sunny day. people sprinkle — the outer surface of the tumbler. The water water on the roof or open ground because — vapour present in air, on coming in contact the large latent heat of vaporisation of water — with the cold glass of water, loses energy and helps to cool the hot surface. gets converted to liquid state. which we see Can you cite some more examples from as water droplets. daily life where we can feel the effect of cooling ms i 9 whe . due to evaporation? vestious Why should we wear cotton clothes in | summer? \ 1. Why does a desert coolcr cool During summer, we perspire more beater ona hot diy dav? because of the mechanism of our body which 2. How does dic water kept in an keeps us cool. We know that during | earthen pot finathal become cool evaporation, the particles at the surface of UJ daring summer? the liquid gain energy from the surroundings 3 Why docs our palm tec) cold or body surface and change into vapour. The When We put sonic acctone or heat energy equal to the latent heat of petrolor pertuine on it? vaporisation is absorbed from the body 4. Why are we able to sip hot tea or leaving the body cool. Cotton, being a good milk faster from a sauecr rather absorber of water helps in absorbing the than a cup? . sweat and exposing it to the atmosphere for 5. What wpe of clathes should we easy evaporation. Weer i) sumuner? [)} What ™,, you have eC FON kets | Sn ms learnt a 4 ° Matter is made up of small particles. ° The matter around us exists in three states—solid, liquid and gas. ° The forces of attraction between the particles are maximum in solids, intermediate in liquids and minimum in gases. ° The spaces in between the constituent particles and kinetic energy of the particles are minimum in the case of solids, intermediate in liquids and maximum. in gases. 10 Science. Reprint 2025 26

[Page 11]
MATTER IN O UR S URROUNDING S 11 • The arrangement of particles is most ordered in the case of solids, in the case of liquids layers of particles can slip and slide over each other while for gases, ther e is no or der, particles just move about randomly. • The states of matter are inter-convertible. The state of matter can be changed by changing temperature or pressure. • Sublimation is the change of solid state directly to gaseous state without going through liquid state. • Deposition is the change of gaseous state directly to solid state without going through liquid state. • Boiling is a bulk phenomenon. Particles from the bulk (whole) of the liquid change into vapour state. • Evaporation is a surface phenomenon. Particles from the surface gain enough energy to overcome the forces of attraction present in the liquid and change into the vapour state. • The rate of evaporation depends upon the surface area exposed to the atmospher e, the temperatur e, the humidity and the wind speed. • Evaporation causes cooling. • Latent heat of vaporisation is the heat energy required to change 1 kg of a liquid to gas at atmospheric pressure at its boiling point. • Latent heat of fusion is the amount of heat energy required to change 1 kg of solid into liquid at its melting point. • Some measurable quantities and their units to remember: Quantity Unit Symbol Temperature kelvin K Length metre m Mass kilogram kg Weight newton N Volume cubic metre m3 Density kilogram per cubic metre kg m–3 Pressure pascal Pa Reprint 2025-26
° The arrangement of particles is most ordered in the case of solids, in the case of liquids layers of particles can slip and slide over each other while for gases, there is no order, particles just move about randomly. ° The states of matter are inter-convertible. The state of matter ean be changed by changing temperature or pressure. ° Sublimation is the change of solid state directly to gaseous state without going through liquid state. ° Deposition is the change of gaseous state directly to solid state without going through liquid state. ° Boiling is a bulk phenomenon. Particles from the bulk (whole) of the liquid change into vapour state. ° Evaporation is a surface phenomenon. Particles from the surface gain enough energy to overcome the forces of attraction present in the liquid and change into the vapour state. ° The rate of evaporation depends upon the surface area exposed to the atmosphere, the temperature, the humidity and the wind speed. ° Evaporation causes cooling. ° Latent heat of vaporisation is the heat energy required to change 1 kg of a liquid to gas at atmospheric pressure at its boiling point. ° Latent heat of fusion is the amount of heat energy required to change | kg of solid into liquid at its melting point. ° Some measurable quantities and their units to remember: emperature kelvin K Length metre m Mass kilogram kg Weight newton N Volume cubic metre m? Density Kilogram per cubic metre kgm? Pressure pascal Pa Marien is OK St rkot xpinas 1 Reprint 2025 26

[Page 12]
SCIENCE12 1. Convert the following temperatures to the celsius scale. (a) 293 K (b) 470 K 2. Convert the following temperatures to the kelvin scale. (a) 25o°C (b) 373o°C 3. Give reason for the following observations. (a) Naphthalene balls disappear with time without leaving any solid. (b) We can get the smell of perfume sitting several metres away. 4. Arrange the following substances in increasing order of forces of attraction between the particles— water, sugar, oxygen. 5. What is the physical state of water at— (a) 25o°C (b) 0o°C (c) 100o°C ? 6. Give two reasons to justify— (a) water at room temperature is a liquid. (b) an iron almirah is a solid at room temperature. 7. Why is ice at 273 K more effective in cooling than water at the same temperature? 8. What produces more severe burns, boiling water or steam? 9. Name A,B,C,D,E and F in the following diagram showing change in its state Exercises Reprint 2025-26
. Ls )s«Exercises faa 1. Convert the following temperatures to the celsius scale. iF a (a) 293 K (b) 470 K . < 2. Convert the following temperatures to the kelvin scale. = (a) 25°C (b) 373° C 3. Give reason for the following observations. (a) Naphthalene balls disappear with time without leaving any solid. (b) We can get the smell of perfume sitting several metres away. 4. Arrange the following substances in increasing order of forces of attraction between the particles— water, sugar, oxygen. 5. What is the physical state of water at— (a) 25°C (b) OFC (ce) 100°C ? 6. Give two reasons to justify— (a) water at room temperature is a liquid. (b) an iron almirah is a solid at room temperature. 7. Why is ice at 273 K more effective in cooling than water at the same temperature? 8. What produces more severe burns, boiling water or steam’? 9. Name A.B.C,D.E and F in the following diagram showing change in its state Increase heat and > decrease pressure GouDys—~——* Cutguib gC as > D — Cc Decrease heat and < increase pressure [7 7 12 Sewxer, Reprint 2025 26

[Page 13]
MATTER IN O UR S URROUNDING S 13 Group Activity Prepare a model to demonstrate movement of particles in solids, liquids and gases. For making this model you will need • A transparent jar • A big rubber balloon or piece of stretchable rubber sheet • A string • Few chickpeas or black gram or dry green peas. How to make? • Put the seeds in the jar. • Sew the string to the centre of the rubber sheet and put some tape to keep it tied securely. • Stretch and tie the rubber sheet on the mouth of the jar . • Your model is ready. Now run your fingers up and d own the string by first tugging at it slowly and then rapidly. Fig. 1.10: A model for converting of solid to liquid and liquid to gas. Reprint 2025-26
oe (|) «Group Activity a, y 2 Prepare a model to demonstrate movement of particles in solids. Qk 2 liqnids and gases. ee For making this model you will need SSSR M/A transparent jar _ ° A big rubber balloon or piece of stretchable rubber sheet ° A string ° Few chickpeas or black gram or dry green peas. How to make? ° Put the seeds in the jar. ° Sew the string to the centre of the rubber sheet and put some tape to keep it tied securely. 3 Stretch and tie the rubber sheet on the mouth of the jar. ° Your model is ready. Now run your fingers up and down the string by first tugging at it slowly and then rapidly. Transparent dar . wee, See 2B, (—— ee f ° ‘» 4 q ‘a H PC 4 P / Dried grains eA aA ge an ' Ao Pullthe string > ae fest stuwly, Uke as B W cigorouels to . ag yay show movement 1c ee Dy, oof pagtivles as big thallact: oe “Sree {@ a side, hounds " Tange: nace! f JP hd gases Lt oe W {/ Fig. 1.10: A model for converting of solid to liquid and liquid to gas. Marien is OK St rkot xpinas 13 Reprint 2025 26