WORK AND ENERGY 117 Fig. 10.5 • The trolley moves forward and hits the wooden block. • Fix a stop on the table in such a manner that the tr olley stops after hitting the block. The block gets displaced. • Note down the displacement of the block. This means work is done on the block by the tr olley as the block has gained energy. • From where does this energy come? • Repeat this activity by incr easing the mass on the pan. In which case is the displacement more? • In which case is the work done more? • In this activity, the moving trolley does work and hence it possesses energy. A moving object can do work. An object moving faster can do mor e work than an identical object moving r elatively slow. A moving bullet, blowing wind, a rotating wheel, a speeding stone can do work. How does a bullet pier ce the target? How does the wind move the blades of a windmill? Objects in motion possess energy. W e call this ener gy kinetic energy. A falling coconut, a speeding car, a rolling stone, a flying aircraft, flowing water, blowing wind, a running athlete etc. possess kinetic energy. In short, kinetic energy is the energy possessed by an object due to its motion. The kinetic energy of an object increases with its speed. How much ener gy is possessed by a moving body by virtue of its motion? By definition, we say that the kinetic energy of a body moving with a certain velocity is equal to the work done on it to make it acquire that velocity. 10.2.2KINETIC ENERGY Activity _____________ 10.6 • Take a heavy ball. Drop it on a thick bed of sand. A wet bed of sand would be better. Dr op the ball on the sand bed from height of about 25 cm. The ball creates a depression. • Repeat this activity fr om heights of 50 cm, 1m and 1.5 m. • Ensure that all the depr essions ar e distinctly visible. • Mark the depr essions to indicate the height fr om which the ball was dropped. • Compare their depths. • Which one of them is deepest? • Which one is shallowest? Why? • What has caused the ball to make a deeper dent? • Discuss and analyse. Activity _____________ 10.7 • Set up the apparatus as shown in Fig. 10.5. • Place a wooden block of known mass in front of the tr olley at a convenient fixed distance. • Place a known mass on the pan so that the trolley starts moving. James Pr escott Joule was an outstanding British physicist. He is best known for his research in electricity and ther modynamics. Amongst other things, he formulated a law for the heating effect of electric curr ent. He also verified experimentally the law of conservation of ener gy and discover ed the value of the mechanical equivalent of heat. The unit of ener gy and work called joule, is named after him. James Prescott Joule (1818 – 1889) Reprint 2025-26
James Prescott 4.7 _] — . outstanding i British physicist. : He ts best known Aa a for his research in ~ PE ute. electricity and o hes" wh thermodynamics. Ae ye 2 ‘ a - ony fh Amongst other b things, he Fig. 10.5 . Wa formulated a law James Prescott Joule for the heating ¢ The trolley moves forward and hits the (1818 - 1889} effect of electric wooden block. current. He also . Fix a stop on the table in such a vertfted experimentally the law of manner that the trolley stops after conservation of energy and discovered hitting the block. The block gets the value of the mechanical equivalent chsplaced. of heat. The unit of energy and work . Note down the displacement of the 4 hlock. This means work is done on the called joule, is named after him. block by the trolley as the block has gained energy. 10.2.2 KINETIC ENERGY ¢ From where does this energy come? . Repeat this activity by increasing the mass on the pan. In which case is the Activity 10.6 displacement more? one cee | . In which case is the work done more? ° pale a heavy pal Prop it on a thick . In this activity, the moving trolley does be hetter, Drop the ball on the sand work and hence it possesses energy. bed from height of about 25 em. The A moving object can do work. An object ball creates a depression. moving faster can do more work than an ¢ — Repeat this activity from heights of identical object moving relatively slow. A 50 em, lm and 1.5 m. . «Ensure that all the depressions are moving bullet, blowing wind, a rotating wheel, disunetly visible. a speeding stone can do work. How does a * Mark the depressions to incheate the bullet pierce the target’? How does the wind height from which the ball was move the blades of a windmill’? Objects in dropped. motion possess energy. We call this energy ¢ Compare their depths. kinetic energy. ° Which one of them is deepest? A falling coconut, a speeding car, a rolling ¢ = Which one is shallowest? Why? stone, a flying aircraft, flowing water, blowing . What has caused the hall to make a - - deeper dent? wind, a running athlete etc. possess kinetic e Discuss and analyse. energy. In short, kinetic energy is the energy . possessed by an object due to its motion. The Activity 10.7 kinetic energy of an object increases with its speed. . Set up the apparatus as shown in How much energy is possessed by a . Dince a wooden block of known mass moving body by virtue of its motion? By in front of the trolley at a convenient definition, we say that the kinetic energy of a fixed distance. . body moving with a certain velocity is equal to . Place a Known mass on the pan so the work done on it to make it acquire that the trolley starts moving. that velocity. Work avo Exexoy 117 Reprint 2025-26 :