SCIENCE114 Activity _____________ 10.3 • Think of situations when the object is not displaced in spite of a force acting on it. • Also think of situations when an object gets displaced in the absence of a force acting on it. • List all the situations that you can think of for each. • Discuss with your friends whether work is done in these situations. 10.1.3WORK DONE BY A CONSTANT FORCE How is work defined in science? T o understand this, we shall first consider the case when the force is acting in the direction of displacement. Let a constant for ce, F act on an object. Let the object be displaced through a distance, s in the direction of the force (Fig. 10.1). Let W be the work done. We define work to be equal to the pr oduct of the for ce and displacement. Work done = force × displacement W = F s (10.1) in day-to-day life. For each of these activities, ask the following questions and answer them: (i) What is the work being done on? (ii) What is happening to the object? (iii) Who (what) is doing the work? 10.1.2SCIENTIFIC CONCEPTION OF WORK To understand the way we view work and define work from the point of view of science, let us consider some situations: Push a pebble lying on a sur face. The pebble moves through a distance. You exerted a for ce on the pebble and the pebble got displaced. In this situation work is done. A girl pulls a trolley and the trolley moves through a distance. The girl has exerted a force on the trolley and it is displaced. Therefore, work is done. Lift a book thr ough a height. T o do this you must apply a for ce. The book rises up. There is a force applied on the book and the book has moved. Hence, work is done. A closer look at the above situations reveals that two conditions need to be satisfied for work to be done: (i) a force should act on an object, and (ii) the object must be displaced. If any one of the above conditions does not exist, work is not done. This is the way we view work in science. A bullock is pulling a cart. The cart moves. There is a force on the cart and the cart has moved. Do you think that work is done in this situation? Activity _____________ 10.2 • Think of some situations from your daily life involving work. • List them. • Discuss with your friends whether work is being done in each situation. • Try to reason out your response. • If work is done, which is the force acting on the object? • What is the object on which the work is done? • What happens to the object on which work is done? Fig. 10.1 Thus, work done by a force acting on an object is equal to the magnitude of the force multiplied by the distance moved in the dir ection of the for ce. W ork has only magnitude and no direction. In Eq. (10.1), if F = 1 N and s = 1 m then the work done by the for ce will be 1 N m. Here the unit of work is newton metre (N m) or joule (J). Thus 1 J is the amount of work Reprint 2025-26
in day-to-day life. For each of these Activity 10.3 activities, ask the following questions TTT . and answer them: . Think of situations when the object (i) What is the work being done on? is not displaced in spite of a force (ii) What is happening to the object? acting on it. (ii) Who (what) is doing the work? . Also think of situations when an object gets displaced in the absence of a force spp Ropr pres ps. saeayer: sae . acting on it. 10.1.2 SCIENTIFIC CONCEPTION OF WORK . List all the situations that you can To understand the way we view work and . unk of for cach. friends whett define work from the point of view of science, wok dene, oe \Inese situations ner let us consider some situations: : —_ - Push a pebble lying on a surface. The . . vee pene pebble moves through a distance. You exerted 10.1.3 WORK DONE BY A CONSTANT a force on the pebble and the pebble got FORCE displaced. In this situation work is done. llow is work defined in science? To h A an Puts trolley and the trolley Meda understand this, we shall first consider the Wrouga a distance. “The girl has exerted @ ase when the force is acting in the direction force on the trolley and it is displaced. Sd. ° Therefore. work is done of displacement. nerelore, WORK 18 Gone. on Let a constant force, Fact on an object. Lift a book through a height. To do this Let the object be displaced through a you must apply a force. The book rises up. distance, s in the direction of the force (Fig. There is a force applied on the book and the 10.1). Let Whe the work done. We define work book has moved. Hence, work is done. to be equal to the product of the force and A closer look at the above situations od displacement. reveals that two conditions need to be Work done = force x displacement satisfied for work to be done: (i) a force should W = Fs xenspl (10.1) act on an object, and (ii) the object must be a . displaced. <—_—_ : ——— > If any one of the above conditions does E at not exist. work is not done. This is the way : we view work in science. A bullock is pulling a cart. The cart moves. There is a force on the cart and the cart has moved. Do you think that work is done in this situation? Activity 10.2 « ‘Think of some situations from your Fig. 10.1 daily life involving work. ¢ last them, Thus, work done by a force acting on an ¢ Discuss with your triends whether object is equal to the magnitude of the force work is being done in each situation. multiplied by the distance moved in the ° Try to reason out your response. - direction of the force. Work has only . If work 1s done, which is the force acting magnitude and no direction . on the object? oe “ . . ® = What is the object on which the work In Eq. (10.1). if F= 1 Nand s= 1m then is done? the work done by the force will be 1 Nm. . What happens to the object on which Here the unit of work is newton metre (N m) work is done? or joule (J). Thus 1 J is the amount of work 114 Science. Reprint 2025-26