SCIENCE116 raised hammer falls on a nail placed on a piece of wood, it drives the nail into the wood. We have also observed children winding a toy (such as a toy car) and when the toy is placed on the floor, it starts moving. When a balloon is filled with air and we press it we notice a change in its shape. As long as we press it gently, it can come back to its original shape when the force is withdrawn. However, if we press the balloon hard, it can even explode producing a blasting sound. In all these examples, the objects acquire, through different means, the capability of doing work. An object having a capability to do work is said to possess energy. The object which does the work loses energy and the object on which the work is done gains energy. How does an object with energy do work? An object that possesses energy can exert a force on another object. When this happens, energy is transferred from the former to the latter. The second object may move as it receives energy and therefore do some work. Thus, the first object had a capacity to do work. This implies that any object that possesses energy can do work. The energy possessed by an object is thus measured in terms of its capacity of doing work. The unit of energy is, therefore, the same as that of work, that is, joule (J). 1 J is the ener gy r equir ed to do 1 joule of work. Sometimes a larger unit of energy called kilo joule (kJ) is used. 1 kJ equals 1000 J. 10.2.1FORMS OF ENERGY Luckily the world we live in provides energy in many different forms. The various forms include mechanical energy (potential energy + kinetic ener gy), heat ener gy, chemical energy, electrical energy and light energy. Think it over ! How do you know that some entity is a form of energy? Discuss with your friends and teachers. Work done, W = F × s = mg × s = 15 kg × 10 m s-2 × 1.5 m = 225 kg m s-2 m = 225 N m = 225 J Work done is 225 J. uestions 1. When do we say that work is done? 2. Write an expression for the work done when a for ce is acting on an object in the direction of its displacement. 3. Define 1 J of work. 4. A pair of bullocks exerts a force of 140 N on a plough. The field being ploughed is 15 m long. How much work is done in ploughing the length of the field? 10.2Energy Life is impossible without energy. The demand for energy is ever incr easing. Where do we get ener gy fr om? The Sun is the biggest natural source of energy to us. Many of our energy sources are derived from the Sun. We can also get energy from the nuclei of atoms, the interior of the earth, and the tides. Can you think of other sources of energy? Activity _____________ 10.5 • A few sources of energy are listed above. There are many other sources of energy. List them. • Discuss in small gr oups how certain sources of energy are due to the Sun. • Are there sources of energy which are not due to the Sun? The word energy is very often used in our daily life, but in science we give it a definite and pr ecise meaning. Let us consider the following examples: when a fast moving cricket ball hits a stationary wicket, the wicket is thr own away. Similarly, an object when raised to a certain height gets the capability to do work. You must have seen that when a Q Reprint 2025-26
Work done, Wo= Fx s= mex s raised hammer falls on a nail placed on a piece = 15kgx10ms’x 1.5m of wood, it drives the nail into the wood. We = 225kgms?m have also observed children winding a toy = 225Nm= 225J (such as a toy car) and when the toy is placed Work done is 225 J. on the floor, it starts moving. When a balloon is filled with air and we press it we notice a (" uestions change in its shape. As long as we press it i || ; : gently, it can come back to its original shape ho When do we sav that work is when the force is withdrawn. However, if we donc? press the balloon hard, it can even explode | 2. Write an expression tor the work producing a blasting sound. In all these | donc when a force is acting on examples. the objects acquire, through UJ an object in the direction of its different means, the capability of doing work. displacement. An object having a capability to do work is & Detine 13 of work. : said to possess energy. The object which does 4. A pair of bullocks exerts a forec the work loses energy and the object on which of 140N ona plough. The tield the work is done gains energy. being ploughed fs 15 m long. How does an object with energy do work? How amen work is done in An object that possesses energy can exert a ploughing the length of the field? force on another object. When this happens, energy is transferred from the former to the 10.2 Energy latter. The second object may move as it receives energy and therefore do some work. Life is impossible without energy. The demand — Thus, the first object had a capacity to do for energy is ever increasing. Where do we — work. This implies that any object that get energy from? The Sun is the biggest possesses energy can do work. natural source of energy to us. Many of our The energy possessed by an object is thus energy sources are derived from the Sun. We — measured in terms of its capacity of doing can also get energy from the nuclei of atoms, work. The unit of energy is, therefore, the same the interior of the earth, and the tides. Can as that of work, that is. joule (J). 1 J is the you think of other sources of energy? . . energy required to do 1 joule of work. Activity 10.5 Sometimes a larger unit of energy called kilo joule (kJ) is used. 1 kJ equals 1000 J. . A few sources of energy are listed above. There are many other sources 10.2.1 FoRMS OF ENERGY of energy. List them. ¢ Discuss in small groups how certain Luckily the world we live in provides energy in sourecs of energy are due to the Sun. many different forms. The various forms ° ar there ne Su ot energy which are include mechanical energy (potential energy not due to The Sun: + kinetic energy), heat energy. chemical The word energy is very often used in our energy. electrical energy and light energy. daily life, but in science we give it a definite : : : and precise meaning. Let us consider the following examples: when a fast moving Think it over ! cricket ball hits a stationary wicket. the wicket How do you know that some entity is a is thrown away. Similarly, an object when form of energy? Discuss with your friends raised to a certain height gets the capability and teachers. . to do work. You must have seen that when a 116 Science. : Reprint 2025-26