WORK AND ENERGY 115 done on an object when a for ce of 1 N displaces it by 1 m along the line of action of the force. Look at Eq. (10.1) carefully. What is the work done when the for ce on the object is zero? What would be the work done when the displacement of the object is zero? Refer to the conditions that ar e to be satisfied to say that work is done. Example 10.1 A force of 5 N is acting on an object. The object is displaced through 2 m in the direction of the force (Fig. 10.2). If the force acts on the object all through the displacement, then work done is 5 N × 2 m =10 N m or 10 J. Fig. 10.4 Consider a situation in which an object is moving with a uniform velocity along a particular direction. Now a retarding force, F, is applied in the opposite direction. That is, the angle between the two directions is 180º. Let the object stop after a displacement s. In such a situation, the work done by the force, F is taken as negative and denoted by the minus sign. The work done by the force is F × (–s) or (–F × s). It is clear from the above discussion that the work done by a force can be either positive or negative. To understand this, let us do the following activity: Activity _____________ 10.4 • Lift an object up. Work is done by the force exerted by you on the object. The object moves upwar ds. The for ce you exerted is in the dir ection of displacement. However , ther e is the force of gravity acting on the object. • Which one of these for ces is doing positive work? • Which one is doing negative work? • Give reasons. Work done is negative when the force acts opposite to the dir ection of displacement. Work done is positive when the force is in the direction of displacement. Example 10.2 A porter lifts a luggage of 15 kg from the ground and puts it on his head 1.5 m above the ground. Calculate the work done by him on the luggage. Solution: Mass of luggage, m = 15 kg and displacement, s = 1.5 m. Fig. 10.2 uestion 1. A force of 7 N acts on an object. The displacement is, say 8 m, in the dir ection of the for ce (Fig. 10.3). Let us take it that the force acts on the object through the displacement. What is the work done in this case? Fig. 10.3 Consider another situation in which the force and the displacement are in the same direction: a baby pulling a toy car parallel to the ground, as shown in Fig. 10.4. The baby has exerted a for ce in the dir ection of displacement of the car. In this situation, the work done will be equal to the product of the force and displacement. In such situations, the work done by the force is taken as positive. Q Reprint 2025-26
done on an object when a force of 1 N on) displaces it by 1 m along the line of action of go ee . Net) the force. Zornes . 4 5) Look at Eq. (10.1) carefully. What is the work done when the force on the object is (7 a) zero? What would be the work done when om) 3 the displacement of the object is zero? Refer < to the conditions that are to be satisfied to Fig. 10.4 say that work is done. Consider a situation in which an object is NNN moving with a uniform velocity along a Example 10.1 A force of 5 N is acting on particular direction. Now a retarding force, F, an object. The object is displaced is applied in the opposite direction. That is, through 2 m in the direction of the force the angle between the two directions is 180°. (Fig. 10.2). Ifthe force acts on the object Let the object stop after a displacement s. In all through the displacement, then work such a situation, the work done by the force, done is5Nx2m =10ONmor 10d. Fis taken as negative and denoted by the minus sign. The work done by the force is Fx {-s) or (-F’« s). —— 2m — It is clear from the above discussion that 5\—> - CJ the work done by a force can be either positive or negative. To understand this, let us do the Fig. 10.2 following activity: Activity i+: (" vest an . Lift an object up. Work is done by the | \ 1. A force of 7X acts on an object. force exerted by you on the object. The The displacement is, sav 8 m. in object moves upwards. The force you the direction of the force exerted is in the direction of | (Fig. 10.3). Let us take it thatthe displacement. However, there 1s the | force acts on the object Hhrough lorce of gravity acting on the object. U aes ‘ bad . Which one of these forces is doing the displacement What is the positive work? work done in this case? * = Which one is doing negative work? . Give reasons, _ am ————_> Work done is negative when the force acts iN? Fs rT opposite to the direction of displacement. Fig. 10.3 Work done is positive when the force is in the ooo direction of displacement. Consider another situation in which the Example 10.2 A porter lifts a luggage of force and the displacement are in the same 15 kg from the ground and puts it on direction: a baby pulling a toy car parallel to his head 1.5 m above the ground. the ground, as shown in Fig. 10.4. The baby Calculate the work done by him on the has exerted a force in the direction of luggage. displacement of the car. In this situation, the Solution: work done will be equal to the product of the force and displacement. In such situations, Mass of luggage. mr = 15 kg and the work done by the force is taken as positive. displacement, $= 1.5 m. Worn avo Exnrar 115 Reprint 2025-26 :