SCIENCE120 10.2.4POTENTIAL ENERGY OF AN OBJECT AT A HEIGHT An object increases its energy when raised through a height. This is because work is done on it against gravity while it is being raised. The energy present in such an object is the gravitational potential energy. The gravitational potential ener gy of an object at a point above the ground is defined as the work done in raising it from the ground to that point against gravity. It is easy to arrive at an expr ession for the gravitational potential energy of an object at a height. Fig. 10.7 Consider an object of mass, m. Let it be raised through a height, h fr om the ground. A force is required to do this. The minimum force required to raise the object is equal to the weight of the object, mg. The object gains energy equal to the work done on it. Let the work done on the object against gravity be W. That is, work done, W = force × displacement = mg × h = mgh Since work done on the object is equal to mgh, an energy equal to mgh units is gained by the object. This is the potential energy (EP) of the object. Ep = mgh (10.6) More to know The potential energy of an object at a height depends on the ground level or the zero level you choose. An object in a given position can have a certain potential energy with respect to one level and a different value of potential energy with respect to another level. It is useful to note that the work done by gravity depends on the difference in vertical heights of the initial and final positions of the object and not on the path along which the object is moved. Fig. 10.8 shows a case where a block is raised from position A to B by taking two different paths. Let the height AB = h. In both the situations the work done on the object is mgh. Fig. 10.8 Example 10.5 Find the energy possessed by an object of mass 10 kg when it is at a height of 6 m above the ground. Given, g = 9.8 m s–2. Solution: Mass of the object, m = 10 kg, displacement (height), h = 6 m, and acceleration due to gravity, g = 9.8 m s–2. From Eq. (10.6), Potential ener gy = mgh = 10 kg × 9.8 m s–2 × 6 m = 588 J. The potential energy is 588 J. Reprint 2025-26
10.2.4 PoTENTIAL ENERGY OF AN OBJECT ME The potential energy of an object at AT A HEIGHT Eg a height depends on the ground level An object increases its energy when raised = ob the vero level you choose. | An through a height. This is because work is ° z ab Pos . men ° ° Pee certain potential energy with respect done on it against gravity while it is being io one level and a different value of raised, The energy present in such an object 5 potential energy with respect to is the gravitational potential energy. => another level. : The gravitational potential energy of an , object at a point above the ground is defined : as the work done in raising it from the ground It is useful to note that t he work done by to that point against gravity 7 gravity depends on the difference in vertical It is easy to arrive at an expression for heights of the initial and final positions of - the object and not on the path along which the gravitational potential energy of an object ~ : at a height the object is moved. Fig. 10.8 shows a case . a where a block is raised from position A to B by taking two different paths. Let the height AB = A. In both the situations the work done on the object is mgh. — \ \ fh i i H " Path 1 ' h Path 2 \ rs | ' a Ground IN A Fig. 10.7 Fig. 10.8 Consider an object of mass, mm. Let it be raised through a height, f from the ground. Example 10.5 Find the energy possessed A force is required to do this. The minimum by an object of mass 10 kg when it is at force required to raise the object is equal to a height of 6 m above the ground. Given, the weight of the object, mg. The object gains g=9.8ms% energy equal to the work done on it. Let the ° work done on the object against gravity be Solution: W. That is. . work done, W = force x displacement Mass of the object. m = 10 kg, = mex hh displacement (height). 4 = 6 m,. and = melt acceleration due to gravity, g= 9.8 ms’. Since work done on the object is equal to From Eq. (10.6), ; mgh, an energy equal to mgh units is gained Potential One = mgh by the object. This is the potential energy (£,) ~ a | x9.Bins*x 6m of the object. = oe . . The potential energy is 588 J. B= ingh {10.6) 120 Science. Reprint 2025-26