SCIENCE122 A stronger person may do certain work in relatively less time. A more powerful vehicle would complete a journey in a shorter time than a less powerful one. We talk of the power of machines like motorbikes and motorcars. The speed with which these vehicles change ener gy or do work is a basis for their classification. Power measures the speed of work done, that is, how fast or slow work is done. Power is defined as the rate of doing work or the rate of transfer of ener gy. If an agent does a work W in time t, then power is given by: Power = work/time or WP = t (10.8) The unit of power is watt [in honour of James Watt (1736 – 1819)] having the symbol W. 1 watt is the power of an agent, which does work at the rate of 1 joule per second. We can also say that power is 1 W when the rate of consumption of energy is 1 J s–1. 1 watt = 1 joule/second or 1 W = 1 J s–1. We express larger rates of energy transfer in kilowatts (kW). 1 kilowatt = 1000 watts 1 kW = 1000 W 1 kW = 1000 J s–1. The power of an agent may vary with time. This means that the agent may be doing work at different rates at different intervals of time. Therefore the concept of average power is useful. We obtain average power by dividing the total energy consumed by the total time taken. Example 10.7 Two girls, each of weight 400 N climb up a rope through a height of 8 m. We name one of the girls A and the other B. Girl A takes 20 s while B takes 50 s to accomplish this task. What is the power expended by each girl? Solution: (i) Power expended by girl A: Weight of the girl, mg = 400 N Displacement (height), h = 8 m Activity 10.15 • An object of mass 20 kg is dropped from a height of 4 m. Fill in the blanks in the following table by computing the potential energy and kinetic energy in each case. Height at Potential Kinetic Ep + Ek which object energy energy is located (Ep= mgh) (Ek = mv2/2) m J J J 4 3 2 1 Just above the ground • For simplifying the calculations, take the value of g as 10 m s–2. Think it over ! What would have happened if nature had not allowed the transformation of energy? There is a view that life could not have been possible without transformation of energy. Do you agree with this? 10.3Rate of Doing Work Do all of us work at the same rate? Do machines consume or transfer energy at the same rate? Agents that transfer ener gy do work at different rates. Let us understand this from the following activity: Activity 10.16 • Consider two children, say A and B. Let us say they weigh the same. Both start climbing up a r ope separately. Both reach a height of 8 m. Let us say A takes 15 s while B takes 20 s to accomplish the task. • What is the work done by each? • The work done is the same. However , A has taken less time than B to do the work. • Who has done more work in a given time, say in 1 s?