In the previous few chapters we have talked about ways of describing the motion of objects, the cause of motion and gravitation. Another concept that helps us understand and interpret many natural phenomena is ‘work’. Closely related to work are energy and power. In this chapter we shall study these concepts. All living beings need food. Living beings have to per form several basic activities to survive. We call such activities ‘life processes’. The energy for these pr ocesses comes fr om food. We need energy for other activities like playing, singing, r eading, writing, thinking, jumping, cycling and running. Activities that are strenuous r equire more energy. Animals too get engaged in activities. For example, they may jump and run. They have to fight, move away fr om enemies, find food or find a safe place to live. Also, we engage some animals to lift weights, carry loads, pull carts or plough fields. All such activities require energy. Think of machines. List the machines that you have come across. What do they need for their working? Why do some engines require fuel like petr ol and diesel? Why do living beings and machines need energy? 10.1Work What is work? There is a dif ference in the way we use the term ‘work’ in day-to-day life and the way we use it in science. T o make this point clear let us consider a few examples. 10.1.1NOT MUCH ‘ WORK’ IN SPITE OF WORKING HARD! Kamali is pr eparing for examinations. She spends lot of time in studies. She reads books, draws diagrams, organises her thoughts, collects question papers, attends classes, discusses pr oblems with her friends, and performs experiments. She expends a lot of ener gy on these activities. In common parlance, she is ‘working hard’. All this ‘hard work’ may involve very little ‘work’ if we go by the scientific definition of work. You are working hard to push a huge rock. Let us say the rock does not move despite all the ef fort. Y ou get completely exhausted. However, you have not done any work on the rock as there is no displacement of the rock. You stand still for a few minutes with a heavy load on your head. You get tired. You have exerted yourself and have spent quite a bit of your energy. Are you doing work on the load? The way we understand the term ‘work’ in science, work is not done. You climb up the steps of a staircase and reach the second floor of a building just to see the landscape from there. You may even climb up a tall tree. If we apply the scientific definition, these activities involve a lot of work. In day-to-day life, we consider any useful physical or mental labour as work. Activities like playing in a field, talking with friends, humming a tune, watching a movie, attending a function ar e sometimes not consider ed to be work. What constitutes ‘work’ depends on the way we define it. W e use and define the ter m work dif ferently in science. T o understand this let us do the following activities: Activity _____________ 10.1 • We have discussed in the above paragraphs a number of activities which we normally consider to be work 10 W WW WWORK ORKORK ORKORK AND ANDAND ANDAND E E E E ENERGY NERGYNERGY NERGYNERGY C hapter Reprint 2025-26
Crna pter 10 Ble WorK AND ENERGY In the previous few chapters we have talked = draws diagrams, organises her thoughts, about ways of describing the motion of — collects question papers. attends classes. objects, the cause of motion and gravitation. — discusses problems with her friends, and Another concept that helps us understand and — performs experiments. She expends a lot of interpret many natural phenomena is ‘work’. energy on these activities. In common Closely related to work are energy and power. — parlance, she is ‘working hard’. All this “hard In this chapter we shall study these concepts. — work’ may involve very little ‘work’ if we go by All living beings need food. Living beings — the scientific definition of work. have to perform several basic activities to You are working hard to push a huge rock. survive. We call such activities ‘life processes’. Let us say the rock does not move despite all The energy for these processes comes from — the effort. You get completely exhausted. food. We need energy for other activities like — However, you have not done any work on the playing. singing, reading, writing, thinking. — rock as there is no displacement of the rock. jumping, cycling and running. Activities that You stand still for a few minutes with a are strenuous require more energy. heavy load on your head. You get tired. You Animals too get engaged in activities. For — have exerted yourself and have spent quite a example. they may jump andrun, They have __ bit of your energy. Are you doing work on the to fight. move away from enemies, find food — load? The way we understand the term ‘work’ or find a safe place to live. Also, we engage — in science, work is not done. some animals to lift weights, carry loads, pull You climb up the steps of a staircase and carts or plough fields. All such activities — reach the second floor of a building just to require energy. see the landscape from there. You may even Think of machines. List the machines that — climb up a tall tree. If we apply the scientific you have come across. What do they need for definition, these activities involve a lot of work. their working? Why do some engines require In day-to-day life, we consider any useful fuel like petrol and diesel’? Why do living — physical or mental labour as work. Activities beings and machines need energy? like playing in a field, talking with friends, humming a tune, watching a movie, attending 10.1 Work a function are sometimes not considered to be work. What constitutes ‘work’ depends What is work? There is a difference in the — on the way we define it. We use and define way we use the term ‘work’ in day-to-day life — the term work differently in science. To and the way we use it in science. To make — understand this let us do the following this point clear let us considera fewexamples. — activities: 10.1.1 Not MUCH ‘WORK’ IN SPITE OF Activity 10.1 WORKING HARD! . We have discussed in the above Kamali is preparing for examinations. She paragraphs a number of activities spends lot of time in studies. She reads books, which we normally consider to be work Reprint 2025-26