[Page 1]
In Chapter 3, we have learnt that atoms and molecules ar e the fundamental building blocks of matter . The existence of dif ferent kinds of matter is due to dif ferent atoms constituting them. Now the questions arise: (i) What makes the atom of one element differ ent from the atom of another element? and (ii) Ar e atoms r eally indivisible, as proposed by Dalton, or ar e ther e smaller constituents inside the atom? W e shall find out the answers to these questions in this chapter . W e will lear n about sub-atomic particles and the various models that have been proposed to explain how these particles are arranged within the atom. A major challenge before the scientists at the end of the 19th century was to reveal the structure of the atom as well as to explain its important properties. The elucidation of the structure of atoms is based on a series of experiments. One of the first indications that atoms are not indivisible, comes fr om studying static electricity and the condition under which electricity is conducted by dif ferent substances. 4.1 Charged Particles in Matter For understanding the natur e of char ged particles in matter , let us carry out the following activities: Activity ______________ 4.1 A. Comb dry hair . Does the comb then attract small pieces of paper? B. Rub a glass r od with a silk cloth and bring the rod near an inflated balloon. Observe what happens. From these activities, can we conclude that on rubbing two objects together , they become electrically charged? Where does this charge come fr om? This question can be answered by knowing that an atom is divisible and consists of charged particles. Many scientists contributed in r evealing the presence of charged particles in an atom. It was known by 1900 that the atom was indivisible particle but contained at least one sub-atomic particle – the electron identified by J.J. Thomson. Even before the electron was identified, E. Goldstein in 1886 discovered the presence of new radiations in a gas discharge and called them canal rays. These rays were positively charged radiations which ultimately led to the discovery of another sub-atomic particle. This sub-atomic particle had a charge, equal in magnitude but opposite in sign to that of the electron. Its mass was approximately 2000 times as that of the electron. It was given the name of proton. In general, an electron is represented as ‘e –’ and a proton as ‘p +’. The mass of a proton is taken as one unit and its charge as plus one. The mass of an electron is considered to be negligible and its charge is minus one. It seemed that an atom was composed of protons and electrons, mutually balancing their charges. It also appeared that the protons were in the interior of the atom, for whereas electrons could easily be removed off but not protons. Now the big question was: what sort of structure did these particles of the atom for m? We will find the answer to this question below. 4 S SS SSTRUCTURETRUCTURETRUCTURETRUCTURETRUCTURE OF OFOF OFOF THE THETHE THETHE A A A A ATOM TOMTOM TOMTOM C hapter Reprint 2025-26
C ha pter4 ae acces In Chapter 3, we have learnt that atoms and From these activities, can we conclude molecules are the fundamental building — that on rubbing two objects together, they blocks of matter. The existence of different become electrically charged? Where does this kinds of matter is due to different atoms charge come from? This question can be fe Whew ae mem Now the anestions arise: answered by knowing that an atom is divisible () What makes the atom of one eleme nt and consists of charged particles. different from the atom of another element? Many scientists contributed in revealing and (ii) Are atoms really indivisible. as ' . any 8 ot he eal n oie n revealing proposed by Dalton, or are there smaller the presence of charged particles in an atom. constituents inside the atom’? We shall find It was known by 1900 that the atom was out the answers to these questions in this — indivisible particle but contained at least one chapter. We will learn about sub-atomic — Stib-atomic particle - the electron identified by particles and the various models that have — J.J. Thomson. Even before the electron was been proposed to explain how these particles identified, E. Goldstein in 1886 discovered the are arranged within the atom. presence of new radiations ina gas discharge A major challenge before the scientists at and called them canal rays. These rays were the end of the 19th century was to reveal the positively charged radiations which ultimately Siructare ot the anil as wera te explain is led to the discovery of another sub-atomic Mportanl properties. the eucicallon ohne particle. This sub-atomic particle had a charge, structure of atoms is based on a series of ° 4 . equal in magnitude but opposite in sign to that experiments. , One of the first indications that atoms are 0f the electron. Its mass was approximately not indivisible, comes from studying static 2000 times as that of the electron. It was given electricity and the condition under which — the name of proton. In general, an electron is electricity is conducted by different represented as ‘e” and a proton as ‘p’. The substances. mass ofa proton is taken as one unit and its charge as plus one. The mass of an electron is 4.1 Charged Particles in Matter considered to be negligible and its charge is . minus one, For understanding the nature of charged It seemed that an atom was composed of particles in matter, let us carry out the . . a protons and electrons, mutually balancing following activities: i ° their charges. It also appeared that the protons Activity 4.1 were in the interior of the atom, for whereas electrons could easily be removed off but A. Comb dry hair. Does the comb then . . . . . : oe not protons. Now the big question was: attract small pieces of paper? : B. Rub a glass rod with a silk cloth and what sort of structure did these particles of bring the rod near an inflated balloon. the atom form? We will find the answer to Observe what happens. this question below. Reprint 2025-26

[Page 2]
uestions 1. What are canal rays? 2. If an atom contains one electron and one proton, will it carry any charge or not? 4.2 The Structure of an Atom We have lear nt Dalton’s atomic theory in Chapter 3, which suggested that the atom was indivisible and indestructible. But the discovery of two fundamental particles (electrons and protons) inside the atom, led to the failure of this aspect of Dalton’s atomic theory. It was then consider ed necessary to know how electrons and protons are arranged within an atom. For explaining this, many scientists proposed various atomic models. J.J. Thomson was the first one to propose a model for the structure of an atom. 4.2.1 THOMSON’S MODEL OF AN ATOM Thomson proposed the model of an atom to be similar to that of a Christmas pudding. The electrons, in a sphere of positive charge, were like currants (dry fruits) in a spherical Christmas pudding. We can also think of a watermelon, the positive charge in the atom is spread all over like the r ed edible part of the water melon, while the electr ons ar e studded in the positively charged sphere, like the seeds in the watermelon (Fig. 4.1). Thomson proposed that: (i) An atom consists of a positively charged sphere and the electrons are embedded in it. (ii) The negative and positive charges are equal in magnitude. So, the atom as a whole is electrically neutral. Although Thomson’s model explained that atoms are electrically neutral, the results of experiments carried out by other scientists could not be explained by this model, as we will see below. 4.2.2 RUTHERFORD’S MODEL OF AN ATOM Ernest Rutherford was interested in knowing how the electr ons ar e arranged within an atom. Rutherford designed an experiment for this. In this experiment, fast moving alpha (α)-particles wer e made to fall on a thin gold foil. • He selected a gold foil because he wanted as thin a layer as possible. This gold foil was about 1000 atoms thick. • α-particles ar e doubly-char ged helium ions. Since they have a mass of 4 u, the fast-moving α-particles have a considerable amount of energy. • It was expected that α-particles would be deflected by the sub-atomic particles in the gold atoms. Since the α-particles were much heavier than the pr otons, he did not expect to see large deflections. Q Fig.4.1: Thomson’s model of an atom J.J. Thomson (1856– 1940), a British physicist, was born in Cheetham Hill, a suburb of Manchester , on 18 December 1856. He was awarded the Nobel prize in Physics in 1906 for his work on the discovery of electrons. He directed the Cavendish Laboratory at Cambridge for 35 years and seven of his research assistants subsequently won Nobel prizes. STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM 39 Reprint 2025-26
(1 westions J.J. Thomson (1856- ; 1 What are canal ravs? 1940), a British fag * a 2. Han atom contains onc clectvon physicist, was born in 4 sal and one proton. Will iCcarty any Cheetham Hill, a suburb [isa - \ (| charge or not? of Manchester, on bs . i, 18 December 1856. He | was awarded the Nobel « prize in Physics in 1906 ig for his work on the ere 4.2 The Structure of an Atom discovery of electrons, He directed the Cavendish Laboratory at We have learnt Dalton’s atomic theory in Cambridge for 35 years and seven of his Chapter 3. which suggested that the atom research assistants subsequently won was indivisible and indestructible. But the Nobel prizes. . discovery of two fundamental particles (electrons and protons) inside the atom, led |= Thomson proposed that: to the failure of this aspect of Dalton’s atomic (i) An atom consists of a positively theory. It was then considered necessary to charged sphere and the electrons are know how electrons and protons are arranged embedded in it. within an atom. For explaining this, many (ii) The negative and positive charges are scientists proposed various atomic models. equal in magnitude. So, the atomasa J.J. Thomson was the first one to propose a whole is electrically neutral. model for the structure of an atom. Although Thomson's model explained that oe . . . atoms are electrically neutral, the results of 4.2.1 THOMSON’S MODEL OF AN ATOM experiments carried out by other scientists Thomson proposed the model of an atom to could not be explained by this model, as we be similar to that of a Christmas pudding, Will see below. The electrons, in a sphere of positive charge, were like currants (dry fruits) ina spherical 4.2.2 RUTHERFORD’S MODEL OF AN ATOM Christmas pudding, We can also think ofa Ernest Rutherford was interested in knowing watermelon, the positive charge in the atom ° is spread all over like the red edible part of how the electrons are arranged within an the watermelon. while the electrons are 4tom. Rutherford designed an experiment for studded in the positively charged sphere, like this. In this experiment, fast moving alpha the seeds in the watermelon (Fig. 4.1). (a}-particles were made to fall on a thin gold foil. _. « Heselected a gold foil because he wanted Jo 9 as thin a layer as possible. This gold foil © } positive sphere was about 1000 atoms thick. / } , * «-particles are doubly-charged helium i \ ions. Since they have a mass of 4 u. the 1 o ° | fast-moving a-particles have a © / considerable amount of energy. ° oy Electron e = It was expected that a-particles would be —_° _ deflected by the sub-atomic particles in — the gold atoms. Since the u-particles were much heavier than the protons, he did Fig.4.12 Thoinson’s model ofan atoi not expect to see large deflections. Serco xe oF tHe Arost 39 Reprint 2025-26 :

[Page 3]
SCIENCE40 Fig. 4.2: Scattering of α-particles by a gold foil But, the α-particle scattering experiment gave totally unexpected results (Fig. 4.2). The following observations were made: (i) Most of the fast moving α-particles passed straight through the gold foil. (ii) Some of the α-particles were deflected by the foil by small angles. (iii) Surprisingly one out of every 12000 particles appeared to rebound. In the wor ds of Ruther ford, “This result was almost as incr edible as if you fir e a 15-inch shell at a piece of tissue paper and it comes back and hits you”. He will hear a sound when each stone strikes the wall. If he repeats this ten times, he will hear the sound ten times. But if a blind-folded child were to throw stones at a barbed-wire fence, most of the stones would not hit the fencing and no sound would be heard. This is because there are lots of gaps in the fence which allow the stone to pass through them. Following a similar reasoning, Rutherford concluded fr om the α-particle scattering experiment that— (i) Most of the space inside the atom is empty because most of the α-particles passed through the gold foil without getting deflected. (ii) V ery few particles were deflected from their path, indicating that the positive charge of the atom occupies very little space. (iii) A very small fraction of α-particles were deflected by 1800, indicating that all the positive charge and mass of the gold atom were concentrated in a very small volume within the atom. From the data he also calculated that the radius of the nucleus is about 105 times less than the radius of the atom. On the basis of his experiment, Rutherford put forward the nuclear model of an atom, which had the following features: (i) There is a positively charged centre in an atom called the nucleus. Nearly all the mass of an atom r esides in the nucleus. (ii) The electr ons r evolve ar ound the nucleus in circular paths. (iii) The size of the nucleus is very small as compared to the size of the atom. Drawbacks of Rutherford’s model of the atom The revolution of the electron in a circular orbit is not expected to be stable. Any particle in a circular orbit would undergo acceleration. During acceleration, charged particles would radiate energy. Thus, the revolving electron would lose energy and finally fall into the nucleus. If this were so, the atom should be highly unstable and hence matter would not exist in the form that we know. We know that atoms are quite stable. E. Rutherford (1871–1937) was born at Spring Gr ove on 30 August 1871. He was known as the ‘Father’ of nuclear physics. He is famous for his work on radioactivity and the discovery of the nucleus of an atom with the gold foil experiment. He got the Nobel prize in chemistry in 1908. Let us think of an activity in an open field to understand the implications of this experiment. Let a child stand in fr ont of a wall with his eyes closed. Let him thr ow stones at the wall from a distance. Reprint 2025-26
Gold atoms He will hear a sound when each stone strikes the wall. If he repeats this ten times, he will sparc (estore hear the soundten times. Br u ita Diind folded ft. bet BS ¢ were to throw stones at a barbed-wire — $5 fence. most of the stones would not hit the (+ >< p<) fencing and no sound would be heard. This is OP 2 ° PP because there are lots of gaps in the fence enone, which allow the stone to pass through them. iW=-o-o0 Following a similar reasoning, Rutherford concluded from the a-particle scattering a7 a= experiment that— DOA, (i) Most of the space inside the atom is oe PR) empty because most of the a-particles ~{- b= passed through the gold foil without getting deflected. ———Se (ii) Very few particles were deflected from their path, indicating that the positive charge of the atom occupies very little Pig. 4.2: Scattering ofa-particles by a gold foil space. (iii) A very small fraction of a-particles But, the a-particle scattering experiment were deflected by 180°. indicating that gave totally unexpected results (Fig. 4.2), The all the positive charge and mass of the following observations were made: gold atom were concentrated ina very {i) Most of the fast moving a-particles small volume within the atom. . passed straight through the gold foil. From the data he also calculated that the (i), Some of the a-particles were deflected radius of the nucleus is about 10% times less by the foil by small angles. than the radius of the atom. {iii) Surprisingly one out of every 12000 On the basis of his experiment, particles appeared to rebound. Rutherford put forward the nuclear model of In the words of Rutherford, “This result an atom, which had the following features: was almost as incredible as if you fire a (i) There is a positively charged centre in 15-inch shell at a piece of tissue paper and it an atom called the nucleus. Nearly all comes back and hits you". the mass of an atom resides in the nucleus. ~ E. Rutherford (1871-1937) (ii) The electrons revolve around the ; was born at Spring Grove nucleus in eireular paths. : on 30 August 1871. He was (iii) The size of the nucleus is very small \ ~ known as the ‘Father’ of as compared to the size of the atom. v nuclear physics. He is Drawhacks of Rutherford’s model of famous for his work on the atom radioactivity and the . discovery of the nucleus of an atom with The revolution of the electron in a circular orbit the gold foil experiment. He got the Nobel is not expected to be stable. Any particle in a prize in chemistry in 1908. circular orbit would undergo acceleration. During acceleration, charged particles would — PAO energy. Thus, the revolving electron Let us think of an activity in an open field would lose energy and finally fall into the to understand the implications of this nucleus. If this were so, the atom should be experiment. Let a child stand in front of a highly unstable and hence matter would not wall with his eyes closed. Let him throw — exist in the form that we know. We know that stones at the wall from a distance. — atomsare quite stable. 40 Science. : Reprint 2025-26

[Page 4]
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM 41 4.2.3 BOHR’S MODEL OF ATOM In order to overcome the objections raised against Ruther ford’s model of the atom, Neils Bohr put forwar d the following postulates about the model of an atom: (i) Only certain special orbits known as discrete orbits of electrons, are allowed inside the atom. (ii) While revolving in discr ete orbits the electrons do not radiate energy. uestions 1. On the basis of Thomson’s model of an atom, explain how the atom is neutral as a whole. 2. On the basis of Ruther ford’s model of an atom, which sub- atomic particle is present in the nucleus of an atom? 3. Draw a sketch of Bohr’s model of an atom with three shells. 4. What do you think would be the observation if the α-particle scattering experiment is carried out using a foil of a metal other than gold? 4.2.4 NEUTRONS In 1932, J. Chadwick discovered another sub- atomic particle which had no char ge and a mass nearly equal to that of a proton. It was eventually named as neutron. Neutrons are present in the nucleus of all atoms, except hydr ogen. In general, a neutr on is represented as ‘n’. The mass of an atom is therefore given by the sum of the masses of protons and neutrons present in the nucleus. uestions 1. Name the thr ee sub-atomic particles of an atom. 2. Helium atom has an atomic mass of 4 u and two pr otons in its nucleus. How many neutr ons does it have? 4.3 How are Electrons Distributed in Different Orbits (Shells)? The distribution of electr ons into dif ferent orbits of an atom was suggested by Bohr and Bury. The following rules are followed for writing the number of electr ons in dif ferent energy levels or shells: (i) The maximum number of electr ons present in a shell is given by the Neils Bohr (1885–1962) was bor n in Copenhagen on 7 October 1885. He was appointed pr ofessor of physics at Copenhagen University in 1916. He got the Nobel prize for his work on the structure of atom in 1922. Among Pr ofessor Bohr’s numerous writings, three appearing as books are: (i) The Theory of Spectra and Atomic Constitution, (ii) Atomic Theory and, (iii) The Description of Nature. These orbits or shells are called energy levels. Energy levels in an atom are shown in Fig. 4.3. Q Fig. 4.3: A few energy levels in an atom These orbits or shells are represented by the letters K,L,M,N,… or the numbers, n=1,2,3,4,…. Q Reprint 2025-26
4.2.3 BOHR’S MODEL OF ATOM (" uestions In order to overcome the objections raised \ 1. On the basis of Thomson's model against Rutherford’s model of the atom, ofanatom, cxplain how the atonr Neils Bohr put forward the following is neutral asa whale. postulates about the model of an atom: | 2 On the basis of Ruthertord’s {i) Only certain special orbits known as UJ model of an atom, which sub- discrete orbits of electrons, are allowed atomic particle is present in the inside the atom. nueleus ofan atonr? (ii) While revolving in discrete orbits the 3. Draw a sketeh of Bohr’s model electrons do not radiate energy. ofan atom with dirce shells. 4. Whatdo vou dink would be the observation if the u-particle Neils Bohr (1885-1962) sCaHCHINE CNpCrinene is carricd . was born in Copenhagen out using a tofl of a metal other on 7 October 1885. He was than gold? . appointed professor of physics at Copenhagen 4.2.4 NEUTRONS Jniversity in 1916. He got < U sly 9 8 - Be In 1932, J. Chadwick discovered another sub- the Nobel prize for his work 7 - atomic particle which had no charge and a on the structure of atom in . oe a mass nearly equal to that of a proton. It was 1922. Among Professor . - . . . " eventually named as neutron, Neutrons are Bohr’s numerous writings. three appearing wees . alle . a a present in the nucleus of all atoms, except as books are: . o P 5 i) The Tt { Spectra and Atomic hydrogen. In general. a neutron is (i ne neory © aon ee . ond represented as ‘n’. The mass of an atom is haae eo (tt) in . ieory and. therefore given by the sum of the masses of (iti) The Description of Nature. protons and neutrons present in the nucleus. These orbits or shells are called energy uestions levels. Energy levels in an atom are shown in 1 Name the three sub-atomic Fig. 4.3. | particles of an aton.. 2. Helium atom has an atomic mass S shell an-4) | of fou and avo protons in its M shell (ne2} | nucleus, How many neutrons : YY docs it have? L shell (n=) K shell (n=1) Nucleres 43 Howare Electrons Distributed in Different Orbits (Shells)? The distribution of electrons into different orbits of an atom was suggested by Bohr and Bury. Fig. 4.3: A few energy levels in an aiom The following rules are followed for writing the number of electrons in different energy These orbits or shells are represented by __ levels or shells: the letters K,L,M.N,... or the numbers. (i) The maximum number of electrons n=1,2,3.4,.... present in a shell is given by the Sueccn re oF tHE Ares 4l Reprint 2025-26

[Page 5]
SCIENCE42 formula 2n 2, where ‘n’ is the orbit number or energy level index, 1,2,3,…. Hence the maximum number of electrons in different shells are as follows: first orbit or K-shell will be = 2 × 12 = 2, second orbit or L-shell will be = 2 × 22 = 8, third orbit or M-shell will be = 2 × 32 = 18, fourth orbit or N-shell will be = 2 × 42 = 32, and so on. (ii) The maximum number of electrons that can be accommodated in the outermost orbit is 8. (iii) Electrons are not accommodated in a given shell, unless the inner shells are filled. That is, the shells are filled in a step-wise manner. Atomic structure of the first eighteen elements is shown schematically in Fig. 4.4. • The composition of atoms of the first eighteen elements is given in Table 4.1. uestions 1. Write the distribution of electrons in carbon and sodium atoms. 2. If K and L shells of an atom are full, then what would be the total number of electrons in the atom? 4.4 Valency We have learnt how the electrons in an atom are arranged in dif ferent shells/orbits. The electrons present in the outer most shell of an atom are known as the valence electrons. From the Bohr-Bury scheme, we also know that the outermost shell of an atom can Activity ______________ 4.2 • Make a static atomic model displaying electronic configuration of the first eighteen elements. Fig.4.4: Schematic atomic structure of the first eighteen elements Q accommodate a maximum of 8 electrons. It was observed that the atoms of elements, completely filled with 8 electrons in the outermost shell show little chemical activity. In other words, their combining capacity or valency is zero. Of these inert elements, the Reprint 2025-26
formula 2n?, where ‘n’ is the orbit . The composition of atoms of the first number or energy level index, 1.2,3..... eighteen elements is given in Table 4.1. Hence the maximum number of . electrons in different shells are as (" westions follows: ‘ vee | 1. Write the distribution of electrons first orbit or K-shell will he = 2% vs 2. in’ carbon and sodium atonis. second orbit or L-shell will be = 2 lad 8 20 I Rand L shells of an atom arc third orbit or M-shell will be = 2 « 3*= 18. | fall. then what would be dic total fourth orbit or N-shell will be = 2 « 4? UJ niaiber of clecirons in dae ato? = 32, and so on. (ii) ~The maximum number of electrons that can be accommodated in the outermost orbit is 8. 4.4 Valency (ii) Electrons are not accommodated ina we have learnt how the electrons in an atom given shell, unless the inner shellsare are arranged in different shells/orbits. The filled. That is, the shells are filled ina glectrons present in the outermost shell of step-wise manner, an atom are known as the valence electrons. Atomic structure of the first eighteen From the Bohr-Bury scheme, we also know elements is shown schematically in Fig. 4.4. that the outermost shell of an atom can u He Li Be B c N (e) F Ne Na Me Al Si P s cl Ar Pig.4.4: Schematic atomic structure of the first eighteen elements sbta et accommodate a maximum of 8 electrons. It Activity —______ 4.2 was observed that the atoms of elements, completely filled with 8 electrons in the * = Make a static atomic mode! displaying outermost shell show little chemical activity. electronic configuration of the first In other words, their combining capacity or eighteen elements. valency is zero. Of these inert elements, the A2 Science. Reprint 2025-26

[Page 6]
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM 43 Table 4.1: Composition of Atoms of the First Eighteen Elements with Electron Distribution in Various Shells helium atom has two electrons in its outermost shell and all other elements have atoms with eight electrons in the outermost shell. The combining capacity of the atoms of elements, that is, their tendency to react and form molecules with atoms of the same or different elements, was thus explained as an attempt to attain a fully-filled outermost shell. An outermost-shell, which had eight electrons was said to possess an octet. Atoms would thus react, so as to achieve an octet in the outermost shell. This was done by sharing, gaining or losing electrons. The number of electrons gained, lost or shared so as to make the octet of electrons in the outermost shell, gives us directly the combining capacity of the element, that is, the valency discussed in the previous chapter . For example, hydr ogen/ lithium/sodium atoms contain one electron each in their outermost shell, therefore each one of them can lose one electron. So, they are said to have valency of one. Can you tell, what is valency of magnesium and aluminium? It is two and three, respectively, because magnesium has two electrons in its outermost shell and aluminium has thr ee electrons in its outermost shell. If the number of electr ons in the outermost shell of an atom is close to its full capacity, then valency is deter mined in a different way. For example, the fluorine atom has 7 electrons in the outermost shell, and its valency could be 7. But it is easier for Name of Symbol Atomic Number Number Number Vale- Element Number of of of ncy Protons Neutrons Electrons K L M N Hydrogen H 1 1 - 1 1 - - - 1 Helium He 2 2 2 2 2 - - - 0 Lithium Li 3 3 4 3 2 1 - - 1 Beryllium Be 4 4 5 4 2 2 - - 2 Boron B 5 5 6 5 2 3 - - 3 Carbon C 6 6 6 6 2 4 - - 4 Nitrogen N 7 7 7 7 2 5 - - 3 Oxygen O 8 8 8 8 2 6 - - 2 Fluorine F 9 9 10 9 2 7 - - 1 Neon Ne 10 10 10 10 2 8 - - 0 Sodium Na 11 11 12 11 2 8 1 - 1 Magnesium Mg 12 12 12 12 2 8 2 - 2 Aluminium Al 13 13 14 13 2 8 3 - 3 Silicon Si 14 14 14 14 2 8 4 - 4 Phosphorus P 15 15 16 15 2 8 5 - 3,5 Sulphur S 16 16 16 16 2 8 6 - 2 Chlorine Cl 17 17 18 17 2 8 7 - 1 Argon Ar 18 18 22 18 2 8 8 0 Distribution of Electrons Reprint 2025-26
Table 4.1: Composition of Atoms of the First Eighteen Elements with Electron Distribution in Various Shells Name of Symbol] Atomic | Number] Number | Number | Distribution of Vale- Element. Number of of of Electrons ney Protons|Neutrons|/Electrons| K LM N Hydrogen H 1 1 - 1 1 - - - 1 Helium He 2 2 2 2 2 - - - ie) Lithium Lt 3 3 4 3 2 1 - - 1 Berylltum Be 4 4 5 4 2 2 - - 2 Boron B 5 5 6 5 2 3 - - 3 Carbon Cc 6 6 6 6 2 4 - - 4 Nitrogen N 7 7 7 7 2 5 - - 3 Oxygen oO 8 8 8 8 2 6 - - 2 Fluorine F 9 9 10 9 2 7 - - 1 Neon Ne 10 10 10 10 2 8 - - 0 Sodium Na 11 11 12 1 2 8 1 - 1 Magnesium Mg 12 12 12 12 2 8 2. - 2 Aluminium Al 13 13 14 13 2 8 3.0 3 Silicon Si 14 14 14 14 2 8 4. - 4 Phosphorus P 15 15 16 15 2 8 5 - 3,5 Sulphur $s 16 16 16 16 2 8 6 - 2 Chlorine cl 17 17 18 17 2 8 7 - 1 Argon Ar 18 18 22 18 2 8 8 ie) helium atom has two electrons in its outermost — element, that is, the valency discussed in the shell and all other elements have atoms with — previous chapter. For example, hydrogen/ eight electrons in the outermost shell. lithium/sodium atoms contain one electron The combining capacity of the atoms of each in their outermost shell, therefore each elements, that is. their tendency to reactand — One of them can lose one electron. So, they are form molecules with atoms of the same or said to have valency of one. Can you tell, what eee . aes . . nee is valency of magnesium and aluminium? It different elements, was thus explained as an ° ° . is two and three, respectively, because attempt to attain a fully-filled outermost shell. anes has elec 5 ts 5 ‘An outermost-shell, which had eight electrons magnesium has two electrons in its outermost ine ‘ i ; . shell and aluminium has three electrons in was said to possess an octet. Atoms would its outermost shell. thus react, so as to achieve an octet in the If the number of electrons in the outermost shell. This was done by sharing. — outermost shell of an atom is close to its full gaining or losing electrons. The number of — capacity, then valency is determined in a electrons gained. lost or shared soastomake different way. For example, the fluorine atom the octet of electrons in the outermost shell, has 7 electrons in the outermost shell, and its gives us directly the combining capacity ofthe — valency could be 7. But it is easier for Serco xe oF tHe Arost A3 Reprint 2025-26

[Page 7]
SCIENCE44 fluorine to gain one electron instead of losing seven electrons. Hence, its valency is determined by subtracting seven electrons from the octet and this gives you a valency of one for fluorine. Valency can be calculated in a similar manner for oxygen. What is the valency of oxygen that you get from this calculation? Therefore, an atom of each element has a definite combining capacity, called its valency. Valency of the first eighteen elements is given in the last column of Table 4.1. uestion 1. How will you find the valency of chlorine, sulphur and magnesium? 4.5 Atomic Number and Mass Number 4.5.1 ATOMIC NUMBER We know that pr otons ar e pr esent in the nucleus of an atom. It is the number of protons of an atom, which deter mines its atomic number. It is denoted by ‘Z’. All atoms of an element have the same atomic number, Z. In fact, elements are defined by the number of protons they possess. For hydrogen, Z = 1, because in hydrogen atom, only one proton is pr esent in the nucleus. Similarly, for carbon, Z = 6. Therefore, the atomic number is defined as the total number of pr otons present in the nucleus of an atom. 4.5.2 MASS NUMBER After studying the pr operties of the sub- atomic particles of an atom, we can conclude that mass of an atom is practically due to protons and neutr ons alone. These ar e present in the nucleus of an atom. Hence pr otons and neutr ons ar e also called nucleons. Ther efore, the mass of an atom resides in its nucleus. For example, mass of carbon is 12 u because it has 6 protons and 6 neutrons, 6 u + 6 u = 12 u. Similarly, the mass of aluminium is 27 u (13 protons+14 neutrons). The mass number is defined as the sum of the total number of protons and neutrons present in the nucleus of an atom. It is denoted by ‘A’. In the notation for an atom, the atomic number, mass number and symbol of the element are to be written as: Mass Number Q Symbol of element Atomic Number For example, nitrogen is written as 14 7 N . uestions 1. If number of electrons in an atom is 8 and number of protons is also 8, then (i) what is the atomic number of the atom? and (ii) what is the charge on the atom? 2. With the help of T able 4.1, find out the mass number of oxygen and sulphur atom. 4.6 Isotopes In natur e, a number of atoms of some elements have been identified, which have the same atomic number but dif ferent mass numbers. For example, take the case of hydrogen atom, it has three atomic species, namely protium ( 1 1 H), deuterium ( 2 1 H or D) and tritium ( 3 1 H or T). The atomic number of each one is 1, but the mass number is 1, 2 and 3, respectively. Other such examples are (i) carbon, 12 6 C and 14 6 C, (ii) chlorine, 35 17 Cl and 37 17 Cl, etc. On the basis of these examples, isotopes are defined as the atoms of the same element, having the same atomic number but different mass numbers. Ther efore, we can say that there are three isotopes of hydrogen atom, namely protium, deuterium and tritium. Q X A Z Reprint 2025-26
fluorine to gain one electron instead of losing = 6 neutrons. Gu + 6 u = 12 u. Similarly, the seven electrons. Hence, its valency is determined — mass of aluminium is 27 u (13 protons+14 by subtracting seven electrons from the octet | neutrons). The mass number is defined as the and this gives you a valency of one for fluorine. — sum of the total number of protons and Valency can be calculated ina similar manner — neutrons present in the nucleus of an atom. It for oxygen. What is the valency of oxygen that — is denoted by ‘A’. In the notation for an atom, you get from this calculation’? the atomic number, mass number and symbol Therefore, an atom of each element hasa — of the element are to be written as: definite combining capacity, called its valency. T : Mass Number Valency of the first eighteen elements is given A in the last column of Table 4.1. Symbol of . | I How will vou find the valency For example, nitrogen is written as GN, of chlorine, sulphur and 7 magnesium? . Vy (A) westions |) 2. number of electrons in an atom : is Sand number of protons is alse 4.5 Atomic Number and Mass 8 then fi} what is the atoniic Number number of the atonr? and fii} what is the Charge on the atom? 2. With the help of Table 4.1, tind 4.5.1. ATOMIC: NUMBER aut the mass number of oxvecn We know that protons are present in the and sulphur aon. nucleus of an atom. It is the number of protons of an atom, which determines its 4.6 Isotopes atomic number. It is denoted by °Z’. All atoms In nature. a number of atoms of some of an element have the same atomic number, elements have been identified, which have the Z. In fact, elements are defined by the number same atomic number but different mass of protons they possess. For hydrogen. Z = 1. bers. For example, take the case of because in hydrogen atom, only one proton hed fem ¢ i it ‘he Phe - tomic a des is present in the nucleus. Similarly. for hydrogen atom. AS Maree ALONE SPECIES, carbon, Z = 6. Therefore, the atomic number — Namely protium (}11), deuterium (? 1 or D) is defined as the total number of protons : present in the nucleus of an atom. and tritium (| Hor T), The atomic number of each one is 1, but the mass number is 1, 2 4.5.2. MAss NUMBER and 3, respectively. Other such examples are After studying the properties of the sub- (i) carbon, % C and i C, (ii) chlorine, cl atomic particles of an atom, we can conclude ; that mass of an atom is practically due to and a Cl. ete. protons and neutrons alone. These are On the basis of these examples, isotopes present in the nucleus of an atom. Hence are defined as the atoms of the same element, protons and neutrons are also called — having the same atomic number but different nucleons. Therefore, the mass of an atom = mass numbers. Therefore. we can say that resides in its nucleus. For example, mass of | there are three isotopes of hydrogen atom, carbon is 12 u because it has 6 protons and — namely protium, deuterium and tritium. a4 Science. : Reprint 2025-26

[Page 8]
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM 45 Q Many elements consist of a mixture of isotopes. Each isotope of an element is a pure substance. The chemical pr operties of isotopes ar e similar but their physical properties are different. Chlorine occurs in nature in two isotopic forms, with masses 35 u and 37 u in the ratio of 3:1. Obviously, the question arises: what should we take as the mass of chlorine atom? Let us find out. The average atomic mass of chlorine atom, on the basis of above data, will be 35 75 100 37 25 100 × + ×      =      + = =105 4 3 7 4 142 4 35 5 . u The mass of an atom of any natural element is taken as the average mass of all the naturally occuring atoms of that element. If an element has no isotopes, then the mass of its atom would be the same as the sum of protons and neutrons in it. But if an element occurs in isotopic forms, then we have to know the percentage of each isotopic form and then the average mass is calculated. This does not mean that any one atom of chlorine has a fractional mass of 35.5 u. It means that if you take a certain amount of chlorine, it will contain both isotopes of chlorine and the average mass is 35.5 u. Applications Since the chemical properties of all the isotopes of an element ar e the same, normally we ar e not concer ned about taking a mixture. But some isotopes have special properties which find them useful in various fields. Some of them are : (i) An isotope of uranium is used as a fuel in nuclear reactors. (ii) An isotope of cobalt is used in the treatment of cancer. (iii) An isotope of iodine is used in the treatment of goitre. 4.6.1 ISOBARS Let us consider two elements — calcium, atomic number 20, and ar gon, atomic number 18. The number of protons in these atoms is different, but the mass number of both these elements is 40. That is, the total number of nucleons is the same in the atoms of this pair of elements. Atoms of different elements with different atomic numbers, which have the same mass number, ar e known as isobars. uestions 1. For the symbol H,D and T tabulate thr ee sub-atomic particles found in each of them. 2. Write the electronic configuration of any one pair of isotopes and isobars. What you have learnt • Credit for the discovery of electron and proton goes to J.J. Thomson and E.Goldstein, respectively. • J.J. Thomson proposed that electrons are embedded in a positive sphere. Reprint 2025-26
Many elements consist of a mixture of | Applications isotopes. Each isotope of an element is a pure Since the chemical properties of all the substance. The chemical properties of isotopes of an element are the same, isotopes are similar but their physical normally we are not concerned about properties are different. taking a mixture. But some isotopes have Chlorine occurs in nature in two isotopic special properties which find them useful forms, with masses 35 u and 37 u in the ratio in various fields. Some of them are : of 3:1. Obviously, the question arises: what (i) An isotope of uranium is used asa fuel should we take as the mass of chlorine atom’? in nuclear reactors. Let us find out. (ii) An isotope of cobalt is used in the The average atomic mass of chlorine atom, treatment of cancer. on the basis of above data, will be (ili) An isotope of iodine is used in the treatment of goitre. Ss 95 [ss x 7 4 a7 x * | 100 100 4.6.1 IsoBars Let us consider two elements — calcium, _ {105 + 37) _ 142 _ 35.5u atomic number 20, and argon, atomic { 4 4 ) 4 ~~ number 18. The number of protons in these atoms is different, but the mass number of The mass of an atom of any natural element both these elements is 40. That is, the total ste ne caesar once afte coy = number of nucleons is the same in the atoms is taken as the average mass of all the naturally . : , hang « sat ttre 7 of this pair of elements. Atoms of different occuring atoms of that element. Ifan element . oe 7 oe elements with different atomic numbers, which has no isotopes, then the mass of its atom have the same mass number, are known as would be the same as the sum of protons and isobars neutrons in it. But if an element oceurs in ~~ isotopic forms, then we have to know the sims percentage of each isotopic form and then the fy) WeStots average mass is calculated. 1 } 1 For the svmbal H,D and T This does not mean that any one atom of tabulate three sub-atomic chlorine has a fractional mass of 35.5 u. It pardcles found in cach of them. means that if you take a certain amount of | 2 Write the electronic chlorine, it will contain both isotopes of UJ configuration of any one pair of chlorine and the average mass is 35.5 u. isotopes and isobars. [Ss What @ fx, you have hyp Ee aie earnt ° Credit for the discovery of electron and proton goes to J.J. Thomson and E.Goldstein, respectively. ° J.J. Thomson proposed that electrons are embedded in a positive sphere. Sirgen xe Ob THE ATOM AS Reprint 2025-26

[Page 9]
SCIENCE46 • Rutherford’s alpha-particle scattering experiment led to the discovery of the atomic nucleus. • Rutherford’s model of the atom pr oposed that a very tiny nucleus is present inside the atom and electrons revolve around this nucleus. The stability of the atom could not be explained by this model. • Neils Bohr’s model of the atom was mor e successful. He proposed that electrons are distributed in different shells with discrete energy around the nucleus. If the atomic shells ar e complete, then the atom will be stable and less reactive. • J. Chadwick discovered presence of neutrons in the nucleus of an atom. So, the thr ee sub-atomic particles of an atom are: (i) electr ons, (ii) pr otons and (iii) neutr ons. Electr ons ar e negatively charged, protons are positively charged and neutrons have no charges. The mass of an electron is about 1 2000 times the mass of an hydr ogen atom. The mass of a pr oton and a neutron is taken as one unit each. • Shells of an atom are designated as K,L,M,N,…. • Valency is the combining capacity of an atom. • The atomic number of an element is the same as the number of protons in the nucleus of its atom. • The mass number of an atom is equal to the number of nucleons in its nucleus. • Isotopes are atoms of the same element, which have different mass numbers. • Isobars are atoms having the same mass number but different atomic numbers. • Elements are defined by the number of protons they possess. Exercises 1. Compare the properties of electrons, protons and neutrons. 2. What are the limitations of J.J. Thomson’s model of the atom? 3. What are the limitations of Rutherford’s model of the atom? 4. Describe Bohr’s model of the atom. 5. Compare all the pr oposed models of an atom given in this chapter. 6. Summarise the rules for writing of distribution of electrons in various shells for the first eighteen elements. 7. Define valency by taking examples of silicon and oxygen. Reprint 2025-26
° Rutherford’s alpha-particle scattering experiment led to the discovery of the atomic nucleus. ° Rutherford’s model of the atom proposed that a very tiny nucleus is present inside the atom and electrons revolve around this nucleus. The stability of the atom could not be explained by this model. ° Neils Bohr’s model of the atom was more successful. He proposed that electrons are distributed in different shells with discrete energy around the nucleus. If the atomic shells are complete, then the atom will be stable and less reactive. ° J. Chadwick discovered presence of neutrons in the nucleus of an atom. So, the three sub-atomic particles of an atom are: (i) electrons, (ii) protons and (iii) neutrons. Electrons are negatively charged, protons are positively charged and neutrons have no charges. The mass of an electron is about S00 times the mass of an hydrogen atom. The mass of a proton and a neutron is taken as one unit each. 3 Shells of an atom are designated as K,L,M.N..... ° Valency is the combining capacity of an atom. ° The atomic number of an element is the same as the number of protons in the nucleus of its atom. ° The mass number of an atom is equal to the number of nucleons in its nucleus. ° Isotopes are atoms of the same element, which have different mass numbers. ° Isobars are atoms having the same mass number but clifferent atomic numbers. ° Elements are defined by the number of protons they possess. . [sé Exercises om 2 1. Compare the properties of electrons, protons and neutrons. { ; a 2. What are the limitations of J.J. Thomson's model of the atom’? - 3. What are the limitations of Rutherford’s model of the atom? =) 4. Describe Bohr’s model of the atom. 5. Compare all the proposed models of an atom given in this chapter. 6. Summarise the rules for writing of distribution of electrons in various shells for the first eighteen elements. 7. Define valency by taking examples of silicon and oxygen. A6 Science. : Reprint 2025-26

[Page 10]
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM 47 8. Explain with examples (i) Atomic number , (ii) Mass number , (iii) Isotopes and iv) Isobars. Give any two uses of isotopes. 9. Na+ has completely filled K and L shells. Explain. 10. If bromine atom is available in the form of, say, two isotopes 79 35 Br (49.7%) and 81 35 Br (50.3%), calculate the average atomic mass of bromine atom. 11. The average atomic mass of a sample of an element X is 16.2 u. What are the per centages of isotopes 16 8 X and 18 8 X in the sample? 12. If Z = 3, what would be the valency of the element? Also, name the element. 13. Composition of the nuclei of two atomic species X and Y ar e given as under X Y Protons = 6 6 Neutrons = 6 8 Give the mass numbers of X and Y. What is the relation between the two species? 14. For the following statements, write T for True and F for False. (a) J.J. Thomson pr oposed that the nucleus of an atom contains only nucleons. (b) A neutr on is for med by an electr on and a pr oton combining together. Therefore, it is neutral. (c) The mass of an electron is about 1 2000 times that of proton. (d) An isotope of iodine is used for making tinctur e iodine, which is used as a medicine. Put tick (ü ) against correct choice and cross (×) against wrong choice in questions 15, 16 and 17 15. Ruther for d’s alpha-particle scattering experiment was responsible for the discovery of (a) Atomic Nucleus (b) Electron (c) Proton (d) Neutron 16. Isotopes of an element have (a) the same physical properties (b) different chemical properties (c) dif ferent number of neutrons (d) different atomic numbers. 17. Number of valence electrons in Cl– ion are: (a) 16 (b) 8 (c) 17 (d) 18 Reprint 2025-26
8. Explain with examples (i) Atomic number, (ii) Mass number, (iii) Isotopes and iv) Isobars. Give any two uses of isotopes. 9. Na* has completely filled K and L shells. Explain. 10. If bromine atom is available in the form of. say, two isotopes Br (49.7%) and 5) Br (50.3%). calculate the average atomic mass of bromine atom. 11. The average atomic mass of a sample of an clement X is 16.2 u. What are the percentages of isotopes ‘SX and ‘2X in the sample? 12. IfZ=3, what would be the valency of the element? Also, name the clement. 13. Composition of the nuclei of two atomic species X and Y are given as under x Y Protons = 6 6 Neutrons = 6 8 Give the mass numbers of X and Y. What is the relation between the two species? 14. For the following statements, write T for True and F for False. (a) J.J. Thomson proposed that the nucleus of an atom contains only nucleons. (b) A neutron is formed by an electron and a proton combining together. Therefore, it is neutral. (ec) The mass ofan electron is about sooo times that of proton. (d) An isotope of iodine is used for making tincture iodine, which is used as a medicine. Put tick (“) against correct choice and cross (x) against wrong choice in questions 15, 16 and 17 15. Rutherford’s alpha-particle scattering experiment was responsible for the discovery of (a) Atomic Nucleus (b) Electron (ce) Proton (d) Neutron 16. Isotopes of an clement have (a) the same physical properties (b) different chemical properties (ce) different number of neutrons (dq) different atomic numbers. 17. Number of valence electrons in Cl ion are: (a) 16 (b) 8 (c) 17 (d) 18 Sueccn re oF tHE Ares 47 Reprint 2025-26 :

[Page 11]
SCIENCE48 18. Which one of the following is a correct electronic configuration of sodium? (a) 2,8 (b) 8,2,1 (c) 2,1,8 (d) 2,8,1. 19. Complete the following table. Atomic Mass Number Number Number Name of Number Number of of of the Atomic Neutrons Protons Electrons Species 9 - 10 - - - 16 32 - - - Sulphur - 24 - 12 - - - 2 - 1 - - - 1 0 1 0 - Reprint 2025-26
18. Which one of the following is a correct electronic configuration of sodium? (a) 2.8 (b) 82,1 (c) 2.1.8 (d) 2,8,1. 19. Complete the following table. Atomic | Mass | Number |Number| Number | Name of Number |Number of of of the Atomic Neutrons | Protons |Electrons| Species 9 - 10 - - - 16 32 - - - Sulphur - 24 - 12 - - - 2 - 1 - - - 1 0 1 0 - 48 Sewack Reprint 2025-26