SCIENCE44 fluorine to gain one electron instead of losing seven electrons. Hence, its valency is determined by subtracting seven electrons from the octet and this gives you a valency of one for fluorine. Valency can be calculated in a similar manner for oxygen. What is the valency of oxygen that you get from this calculation? Therefore, an atom of each element has a definite combining capacity, called its valency. Valency of the first eighteen elements is given in the last column of Table 4.1. uestion 1. How will you find the valency of chlorine, sulphur and magnesium? 4.5 Atomic Number and Mass Number 4.5.1 ATOMIC NUMBER We know that pr otons ar e pr esent in the nucleus of an atom. It is the number of protons of an atom, which deter mines its atomic number. It is denoted by ‘Z’. All atoms of an element have the same atomic number, Z. In fact, elements are defined by the number of protons they possess. For hydrogen, Z = 1, because in hydrogen atom, only one proton is pr esent in the nucleus. Similarly, for carbon, Z = 6. Therefore, the atomic number is defined as the total number of pr otons present in the nucleus of an atom. 4.5.2 MASS NUMBER After studying the pr operties of the sub- atomic particles of an atom, we can conclude that mass of an atom is practically due to protons and neutr ons alone. These ar e present in the nucleus of an atom. Hence pr otons and neutr ons ar e also called nucleons. Ther efore, the mass of an atom resides in its nucleus. For example, mass of carbon is 12 u because it has 6 protons and 6 neutrons, 6 u + 6 u = 12 u. Similarly, the mass of aluminium is 27 u (13 protons+14 neutrons). The mass number is defined as the sum of the total number of protons and neutrons present in the nucleus of an atom. It is denoted by ‘A’. In the notation for an atom, the atomic number, mass number and symbol of the element are to be written as: Mass Number Q Symbol of element Atomic Number For example, nitrogen is written as 14 7 N . uestions 1. If number of electrons in an atom is 8 and number of protons is also 8, then (i) what is the atomic number of the atom? and (ii) what is the charge on the atom? 2. With the help of T able 4.1, find out the mass number of oxygen and sulphur atom. 4.6 Isotopes In natur e, a number of atoms of some elements have been identified, which have the same atomic number but dif ferent mass numbers. For example, take the case of hydrogen atom, it has three atomic species, namely protium ( 1 1 H), deuterium ( 2 1 H or D) and tritium ( 3 1 H or T). The atomic number of each one is 1, but the mass number is 1, 2 and 3, respectively. Other such examples are (i) carbon, 12 6 C and 14 6 C, (ii) chlorine, 35 17 Cl and 37 17 Cl, etc. On the basis of these examples, isotopes are defined as the atoms of the same element, having the same atomic number but different mass numbers. Ther efore, we can say that there are three isotopes of hydrogen atom, namely protium, deuterium and tritium. Q X A Z Reprint 2025-26
fluorine to gain one electron instead of losing = 6 neutrons. Gu + 6 u = 12 u. Similarly, the seven electrons. Hence, its valency is determined — mass of aluminium is 27 u (13 protons+14 by subtracting seven electrons from the octet | neutrons). The mass number is defined as the and this gives you a valency of one for fluorine. — sum of the total number of protons and Valency can be calculated ina similar manner — neutrons present in the nucleus of an atom. It for oxygen. What is the valency of oxygen that — is denoted by ‘A’. In the notation for an atom, you get from this calculation’? the atomic number, mass number and symbol Therefore, an atom of each element hasa — of the element are to be written as: definite combining capacity, called its valency. T : Mass Number Valency of the first eighteen elements is given A in the last column of Table 4.1. Symbol of . | I How will vou find the valency For example, nitrogen is written as GN, of chlorine, sulphur and 7 magnesium? . Vy (A) westions |) 2. number of electrons in an atom : is Sand number of protons is alse 4.5 Atomic Number and Mass 8 then fi} what is the atoniic Number number of the atonr? and fii} what is the Charge on the atom? 2. With the help of Table 4.1, tind 4.5.1. ATOMIC: NUMBER aut the mass number of oxvecn We know that protons are present in the and sulphur aon. nucleus of an atom. It is the number of protons of an atom, which determines its 4.6 Isotopes atomic number. It is denoted by °Z’. All atoms In nature. a number of atoms of some of an element have the same atomic number, elements have been identified, which have the Z. In fact, elements are defined by the number same atomic number but different mass of protons they possess. For hydrogen. Z = 1. bers. For example, take the case of because in hydrogen atom, only one proton hed fem ¢ i it ‘he Phe - tomic a des is present in the nucleus. Similarly. for hydrogen atom. AS Maree ALONE SPECIES, carbon, Z = 6. Therefore, the atomic number — Namely protium (}11), deuterium (? 1 or D) is defined as the total number of protons : present in the nucleus of an atom. and tritium (| Hor T), The atomic number of each one is 1, but the mass number is 1, 2 4.5.2. MAss NUMBER and 3, respectively. Other such examples are After studying the properties of the sub- (i) carbon, % C and i C, (ii) chlorine, cl atomic particles of an atom, we can conclude ; that mass of an atom is practically due to and a Cl. ete. protons and neutrons alone. These are On the basis of these examples, isotopes present in the nucleus of an atom. Hence are defined as the atoms of the same element, protons and neutrons are also called — having the same atomic number but different nucleons. Therefore, the mass of an atom = mass numbers. Therefore. we can say that resides in its nucleus. For example, mass of | there are three isotopes of hydrogen atom, carbon is 12 u because it has 6 protons and — namely protium, deuterium and tritium. a4 Science. : Reprint 2025-26