uestions 1. What are canal rays? 2. If an atom contains one electron and one proton, will it carry any charge or not? 4.2 The Structure of an Atom We have lear nt Dalton’s atomic theory in Chapter 3, which suggested that the atom was indivisible and indestructible. But the discovery of two fundamental particles (electrons and protons) inside the atom, led to the failure of this aspect of Dalton’s atomic theory. It was then consider ed necessary to know how electrons and protons are arranged within an atom. For explaining this, many scientists proposed various atomic models. J.J. Thomson was the first one to propose a model for the structure of an atom. 4.2.1 THOMSON’S MODEL OF AN ATOM Thomson proposed the model of an atom to be similar to that of a Christmas pudding. The electrons, in a sphere of positive charge, were like currants (dry fruits) in a spherical Christmas pudding. We can also think of a watermelon, the positive charge in the atom is spread all over like the r ed edible part of the water melon, while the electr ons ar e studded in the positively charged sphere, like the seeds in the watermelon (Fig. 4.1). Thomson proposed that: (i) An atom consists of a positively charged sphere and the electrons are embedded in it. (ii) The negative and positive charges are equal in magnitude. So, the atom as a whole is electrically neutral. Although Thomson’s model explained that atoms are electrically neutral, the results of experiments carried out by other scientists could not be explained by this model, as we will see below. 4.2.2 RUTHERFORD’S MODEL OF AN ATOM Ernest Rutherford was interested in knowing how the electr ons ar e arranged within an atom. Rutherford designed an experiment for this. In this experiment, fast moving alpha (α)-particles wer e made to fall on a thin gold foil. • He selected a gold foil because he wanted as thin a layer as possible. This gold foil was about 1000 atoms thick. • α-particles ar e doubly-char ged helium ions. Since they have a mass of 4 u, the fast-moving α-particles have a considerable amount of energy. • It was expected that α-particles would be deflected by the sub-atomic particles in the gold atoms. Since the α-particles were much heavier than the pr otons, he did not expect to see large deflections. Q Fig.4.1: Thomson’s model of an atom J.J. Thomson (1856– 1940), a British physicist, was born in Cheetham Hill, a suburb of Manchester , on 18 December 1856. He was awarded the Nobel prize in Physics in 1906 for his work on the discovery of electrons. He directed the Cavendish Laboratory at Cambridge for 35 years and seven of his research assistants subsequently won Nobel prizes. STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM 39 Reprint 2025-26
(1 westions J.J. Thomson (1856- ; 1 What are canal ravs? 1940), a British fag * a 2. Han atom contains onc clectvon physicist, was born in 4 sal and one proton. Will iCcarty any Cheetham Hill, a suburb [isa - \ (| charge or not? of Manchester, on bs . i, 18 December 1856. He | was awarded the Nobel « prize in Physics in 1906 ig for his work on the ere 4.2 The Structure of an Atom discovery of electrons, He directed the Cavendish Laboratory at We have learnt Dalton’s atomic theory in Cambridge for 35 years and seven of his Chapter 3. which suggested that the atom research assistants subsequently won was indivisible and indestructible. But the Nobel prizes. . discovery of two fundamental particles (electrons and protons) inside the atom, led |= Thomson proposed that: to the failure of this aspect of Dalton’s atomic (i) An atom consists of a positively theory. It was then considered necessary to charged sphere and the electrons are know how electrons and protons are arranged embedded in it. within an atom. For explaining this, many (ii) The negative and positive charges are scientists proposed various atomic models. equal in magnitude. So, the atomasa J.J. Thomson was the first one to propose a whole is electrically neutral. model for the structure of an atom. Although Thomson's model explained that oe . . . atoms are electrically neutral, the results of 4.2.1 THOMSON’S MODEL OF AN ATOM experiments carried out by other scientists Thomson proposed the model of an atom to could not be explained by this model, as we be similar to that of a Christmas pudding, Will see below. The electrons, in a sphere of positive charge, were like currants (dry fruits) ina spherical 4.2.2 RUTHERFORD’S MODEL OF AN ATOM Christmas pudding, We can also think ofa Ernest Rutherford was interested in knowing watermelon, the positive charge in the atom ° is spread all over like the red edible part of how the electrons are arranged within an the watermelon. while the electrons are 4tom. Rutherford designed an experiment for studded in the positively charged sphere, like this. In this experiment, fast moving alpha the seeds in the watermelon (Fig. 4.1). (a}-particles were made to fall on a thin gold foil. _. « Heselected a gold foil because he wanted Jo 9 as thin a layer as possible. This gold foil © } positive sphere was about 1000 atoms thick. / } , * «-particles are doubly-charged helium i \ ions. Since they have a mass of 4 u. the 1 o ° | fast-moving a-particles have a © / considerable amount of energy. ° oy Electron e = It was expected that a-particles would be —_° _ deflected by the sub-atomic particles in — the gold atoms. Since the u-particles were much heavier than the protons, he did Fig.4.12 Thoinson’s model ofan atoi not expect to see large deflections. Serco xe oF tHe Arost 39 Reprint 2025-26 :