STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM 41 4.2.3 BOHR’S MODEL OF ATOM In order to overcome the objections raised against Ruther ford’s model of the atom, Neils Bohr put forwar d the following postulates about the model of an atom: (i) Only certain special orbits known as discrete orbits of electrons, are allowed inside the atom. (ii) While revolving in discr ete orbits the electrons do not radiate energy. uestions 1. On the basis of Thomson’s model of an atom, explain how the atom is neutral as a whole. 2. On the basis of Ruther ford’s model of an atom, which sub- atomic particle is present in the nucleus of an atom? 3. Draw a sketch of Bohr’s model of an atom with three shells. 4. What do you think would be the observation if the α-particle scattering experiment is carried out using a foil of a metal other than gold? 4.2.4 NEUTRONS In 1932, J. Chadwick discovered another sub- atomic particle which had no char ge and a mass nearly equal to that of a proton. It was eventually named as neutron. Neutrons are present in the nucleus of all atoms, except hydr ogen. In general, a neutr on is represented as ‘n’. The mass of an atom is therefore given by the sum of the masses of protons and neutrons present in the nucleus. uestions 1. Name the thr ee sub-atomic particles of an atom. 2. Helium atom has an atomic mass of 4 u and two pr otons in its nucleus. How many neutr ons does it have? 4.3 How are Electrons Distributed in Different Orbits (Shells)? The distribution of electr ons into dif ferent orbits of an atom was suggested by Bohr and Bury. The following rules are followed for writing the number of electr ons in dif ferent energy levels or shells: (i) The maximum number of electr ons present in a shell is given by the Neils Bohr (1885–1962) was bor n in Copenhagen on 7 October 1885. He was appointed pr ofessor of physics at Copenhagen University in 1916. He got the Nobel prize for his work on the structure of atom in 1922. Among Pr ofessor Bohr’s numerous writings, three appearing as books are: (i) The Theory of Spectra and Atomic Constitution, (ii) Atomic Theory and, (iii) The Description of Nature. These orbits or shells are called energy levels. Energy levels in an atom are shown in Fig. 4.3. Q Fig. 4.3: A few energy levels in an atom These orbits or shells are represented by the letters K,L,M,N,… or the numbers, n=1,2,3,4,…. Q Reprint 2025-26
4.2.3 BOHR’S MODEL OF ATOM (" uestions In order to overcome the objections raised \ 1. On the basis of Thomson's model against Rutherford’s model of the atom, ofanatom, cxplain how the atonr Neils Bohr put forward the following is neutral asa whale. postulates about the model of an atom: | 2 On the basis of Ruthertord’s {i) Only certain special orbits known as UJ model of an atom, which sub- discrete orbits of electrons, are allowed atomic particle is present in the inside the atom. nueleus ofan atonr? (ii) While revolving in discrete orbits the 3. Draw a sketeh of Bohr’s model electrons do not radiate energy. ofan atom with dirce shells. 4. Whatdo vou dink would be the observation if the u-particle Neils Bohr (1885-1962) sCaHCHINE CNpCrinene is carricd . was born in Copenhagen out using a tofl of a metal other on 7 October 1885. He was than gold? . appointed professor of physics at Copenhagen 4.2.4 NEUTRONS Jniversity in 1916. He got < U sly 9 8 - Be In 1932, J. Chadwick discovered another sub- the Nobel prize for his work 7 - atomic particle which had no charge and a on the structure of atom in . oe a mass nearly equal to that of a proton. It was 1922. Among Professor . - . . . " eventually named as neutron, Neutrons are Bohr’s numerous writings. three appearing wees . alle . a a present in the nucleus of all atoms, except as books are: . o P 5 i) The Tt { Spectra and Atomic hydrogen. In general. a neutron is (i ne neory © aon ee . ond represented as ‘n’. The mass of an atom is haae eo (tt) in . ieory and. therefore given by the sum of the masses of (iti) The Description of Nature. protons and neutrons present in the nucleus. These orbits or shells are called energy uestions levels. Energy levels in an atom are shown in 1 Name the three sub-atomic Fig. 4.3. | particles of an aton.. 2. Helium atom has an atomic mass S shell an-4) | of fou and avo protons in its M shell (ne2} | nucleus, How many neutrons : YY docs it have? L shell (n=) K shell (n=1) Nucleres 43 Howare Electrons Distributed in Different Orbits (Shells)? The distribution of electrons into different orbits of an atom was suggested by Bohr and Bury. Fig. 4.3: A few energy levels in an aiom The following rules are followed for writing the number of electrons in different energy These orbits or shells are represented by __ levels or shells: the letters K,L,M.N,... or the numbers. (i) The maximum number of electrons n=1,2,3.4,.... present in a shell is given by the Sueccn re oF tHE Ares 4l Reprint 2025-26