STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM 45 Q Many elements consist of a mixture of isotopes. Each isotope of an element is a pure substance. The chemical pr operties of isotopes ar e similar but their physical properties are different. Chlorine occurs in nature in two isotopic forms, with masses 35 u and 37 u in the ratio of 3:1. Obviously, the question arises: what should we take as the mass of chlorine atom? Let us find out. The average atomic mass of chlorine atom, on the basis of above data, will be 35 75 100 37 25 100 × + ×      =      + = =105 4 3 7 4 142 4 35 5 . u The mass of an atom of any natural element is taken as the average mass of all the naturally occuring atoms of that element. If an element has no isotopes, then the mass of its atom would be the same as the sum of protons and neutrons in it. But if an element occurs in isotopic forms, then we have to know the percentage of each isotopic form and then the average mass is calculated. This does not mean that any one atom of chlorine has a fractional mass of 35.5 u. It means that if you take a certain amount of chlorine, it will contain both isotopes of chlorine and the average mass is 35.5 u. Applications Since the chemical properties of all the isotopes of an element ar e the same, normally we ar e not concer ned about taking a mixture. But some isotopes have special properties which find them useful in various fields. Some of them are : (i) An isotope of uranium is used as a fuel in nuclear reactors. (ii) An isotope of cobalt is used in the treatment of cancer. (iii) An isotope of iodine is used in the treatment of goitre. 4.6.1 ISOBARS Let us consider two elements — calcium, atomic number 20, and ar gon, atomic number 18. The number of protons in these atoms is different, but the mass number of both these elements is 40. That is, the total number of nucleons is the same in the atoms of this pair of elements. Atoms of different elements with different atomic numbers, which have the same mass number, ar e known as isobars. uestions 1. For the symbol H,D and T tabulate thr ee sub-atomic particles found in each of them. 2. Write the electronic configuration of any one pair of isotopes and isobars. What you have learnt • Credit for the discovery of electron and proton goes to J.J. Thomson and E.Goldstein, respectively. • J.J. Thomson proposed that electrons are embedded in a positive sphere. Reprint 2025-26
Many elements consist of a mixture of | Applications isotopes. Each isotope of an element is a pure Since the chemical properties of all the substance. The chemical properties of isotopes of an element are the same, isotopes are similar but their physical normally we are not concerned about properties are different. taking a mixture. But some isotopes have Chlorine occurs in nature in two isotopic special properties which find them useful forms, with masses 35 u and 37 u in the ratio in various fields. Some of them are : of 3:1. Obviously, the question arises: what (i) An isotope of uranium is used asa fuel should we take as the mass of chlorine atom’? in nuclear reactors. Let us find out. (ii) An isotope of cobalt is used in the The average atomic mass of chlorine atom, treatment of cancer. on the basis of above data, will be (ili) An isotope of iodine is used in the treatment of goitre. Ss 95 [ss x 7 4 a7 x * | 100 100 4.6.1 IsoBars Let us consider two elements — calcium, _ {105 + 37) _ 142 _ 35.5u atomic number 20, and argon, atomic { 4 4 ) 4 ~~ number 18. The number of protons in these atoms is different, but the mass number of The mass of an atom of any natural element both these elements is 40. That is, the total ste ne caesar once afte coy = number of nucleons is the same in the atoms is taken as the average mass of all the naturally . : , hang « sat ttre 7 of this pair of elements. Atoms of different occuring atoms of that element. Ifan element . oe 7 oe elements with different atomic numbers, which has no isotopes, then the mass of its atom have the same mass number, are known as would be the same as the sum of protons and isobars neutrons in it. But if an element oceurs in ~~ isotopic forms, then we have to know the sims percentage of each isotopic form and then the fy) WeStots average mass is calculated. 1 } 1 For the svmbal H,D and T This does not mean that any one atom of tabulate three sub-atomic chlorine has a fractional mass of 35.5 u. It pardcles found in cach of them. means that if you take a certain amount of | 2 Write the electronic chlorine, it will contain both isotopes of UJ configuration of any one pair of chlorine and the average mass is 35.5 u. isotopes and isobars. [Ss What @ fx, you have hyp Ee aie earnt ° Credit for the discovery of electron and proton goes to J.J. Thomson and E.Goldstein, respectively. ° J.J. Thomson proposed that electrons are embedded in a positive sphere. Sirgen xe Ob THE ATOM AS Reprint 2025-26