[Page 5]
FORCE AND LAWS OF MOTION 91 five-rupees coin if we use a one-rupee coin, we find that a lesser force is required to perform the activity. A force that is just enough to cause a small cart to pick up a large velocity will produce a negligible change in the motion of a train. This is because, in comparison to the cart the train has a much lesser tendency to change its state of motion. Accordingly, we say that the train has more inertia than the cart. Clearly, heavier or more massive objects offer larger inertia. Quantitatively, the inertia of an object is measured by its mass. We may thus relate inertia and mass as follows: Inertia is the natural tendency of an object to resist a change in its state of motion or of rest. The mass of an object is a measur e of its inertia. uestions 1. Which of the following has more inertia: (a) a rubber ball and a stone of the same size? (b) a bicycle and a train? (c) a five - rupees coin and a one-rupee coin? 2. In the following example, try to identify the number of times the velocity of the ball changes: “A football player kicks a football to another player of his team who kicks the football towar ds the goal. The goalkeeper of the opposite team collects the football and kicks it towards a player of his own team”. Also identify the agent supplying the force in each case. 3. Explain why some of the leaves may get detached from a tree if we vigorously shake its branch. 4. Why do you fall in the forwar d direction when a moving bus brakes to a stop and fall backwards when it accelerates from rest? 8.4 Second Law of Motion The first law of motion indicates that when an unbalanced external force acts on an object, Activity 8.2 • Set a five-rupee coin on a stiff card covering an empty glass tumbler standing on a table as shown in Fig. 8.7. • Give the card a sharp horizontal flick with a finger. If we do it fast then the card shoots away, allowing the coin to fall vertically into the glass tumbler due to its inertia. • The inertia of the coin tries to maintain its state of rest even when the card flows off. Fig. 8.7: When the card is flicked with the finger the coin placed over it falls in the tumbler. Activity 8.3 • Place a water-filled tumbler on a tray. • Hold the tray and turn around as fast as you can. • We observe that the water spills. Why? Observe that a gr oove is pr ovided in a saucer for placing the tea cup. It pr events the cup from toppling over in case of sudden jerks. 8.3 Inertia and Mass All the examples and activities given so far illustrate that there is a resistance offered by an object to change its state of motion. If it is at rest it tends to remain at rest; if it is moving it tends to keep moving. This property of an object is called its inertia. Do all bodies have the same inertia? We know that it is easier to push an empty box than a box full of books. Similarly, if we kick a football it flies away. But if we kick a stone of the same size with equal force, it hardly moves. We may, in fact, get an injury in our foot while doing so! Similarly, in activity 8.2, instead of a Q

[Page 6]
SCIENCE92 92929292 its velocity changes, that is, the object gets an acceleration. We would now like to study how the acceleration of an object depends on the force applied to it and how we measure a force. Let us recount some observations from our everyday life. During the game of table tennis if the ball hits a player it does not hurt him. On the other hand, when a fast moving cricket ball hits a spectator, it may hurt him. A truck at rest does not require any attention when parked along a roadside. But a moving truck, even at speeds as low as 5 m s –1, may kill a person standing in its path. A small mass, such as a bullet may kill a person when fired from a gun. These observations suggest that the impact produced by the objects depends on their mass and velocity. Similarly, if an object is to be accelerated, we know that a greater force is required to give a greater velocity. In other words, there appears to exist some quantity of importance that combines the object’s mass and its velocity. One such property called momentum was introduced by Newton. The momentum, p of an object is defined as the product of its mass, m and velocity, v. That is, p = mv (8.1) Momentum has both direction and magnitude. Its direction is the same as that of velocity, v. The SI unit of momentum is kilogram-metre per second (kg m s -1). Since the application of an unbalanced force brings a change in the velocity of the object, it is therefore clear that a force also pr oduces a change of momentum. Let us consider a situation in which a car with a dead battery is to be pushed along a straight road to give it a speed of 1 m s-1, which is sufficient to start its engine. If one or two persons give a sudden push (unbalanced force) to it, it hardly starts. But a continuous push over some time results in a gradual acceleration of the car to this speed. It means that the change of momentum of the car is not only determined by the magnitude of the force but also by the time during which the force is exerted. It may then also be concluded that the force necessary to change the momentum of an object depends on the time rate at which the momentum is changed. The second law of motion states that the rate of change of momentum of an object is proportional to the applied unbalanced force in the direction of force. 8.4.1 MATHEMATICAL FORMULATION OF SECOND LAW OF MOTION Suppose an object of mass, m is moving along a straight line with an initial velocity, u. It is uniformly accelerated to velocity, v in time, t by the application of a constant force, F throughout the time, t. The initial and final momentum of the object will be, p1 = mu and p2 = mv r espectively. The change in momentum ∝ p2 – p1 ∝ mv – mu ∝ m × (v – u). The rate of change of momentum ∝ ( )× −m v u t Or, the applied force, F ∝ ( )× −m v u t ( )× −= km v u t F (8.2) = kma (8.3) Here a ∝ = [(v – u)/t] is the acceleration, which is the rate of change of velocity. The quantity, k is a constant of proportionality. The SI units of mass and acceleration are kg and m s -2 respectively. The unit of force is so chosen that the value of the constant, k becomes one. For this, one unit of force is defined as the amount that produces an acceleration of 1 m s-2 in an object of 1 kg mass. That is, 1 unit of force = k × (1 kg) × (1 m s-2). Thus, the value of k becomes 1. From Eq. (8.3) F = ma (8.4) The unit of force is kg m s -2 or newton, which has the symbol N. The second law of

[Page 7]
FORCE AND LAWS OF MOTION 93 9393 9393 motion gives us a method to measure the force acting on an object as a product of its mass and acceleration. The second law of motion is often seen in action in our everyday life. Have you noticed that while catching a fast moving cricket ball, a fielder in the ground gradually pulls his hands backwards with the moving ball? I n doing so, the fielder increases the time during which the high velocity of the moving ball decreases to zero. Thus, the acceleration of the ball is decreased and therefore the impact of catching the fast moving ball (Fig. 8.8) is also reduced. If the ball is stopped suddenly then its high velocity decreases to zero in a very short interval of time. Thus, the rate of change of momentum of the ball will be large. Therefore, a large force would have to be applied for holding the catch that may hurt the palm of the fielder. In a high jump athletic event, the athletes are made to fall either on a cushioned bed or on a sand bed. This is to increase the time of the athlete’s fall to stop after making the jump. This decreases the rate of change of momentum and hence the force. Try to ponder how a karate player breaks a slab of ice with a single blow. The first law of motion can be mathematically stated from the mathematical expression for the second law of motion. Eq. (8.4) is F = ma or F ( ) −= m v u t (8.5) or Ft = mv – mu That is, when F = 0, v = u for whatever time, t is taken. This means that the object will continue moving with uniform velocity , u throughout the time, t. If u is zero then v will also be zero. That is, the object will remain at rest. Exampl ExamplExampl ExamplExampleee ee 8.1 8.18.1 8.18.1 A constant force acts on an object of mass 5 kg for a duration of 2 s. I t increases the object’ s velocity from 3 m s –1 to 7 m s -1. F ind the magnitude of the applied force. Now, if the force was applied for a duration of 5 s, what would be the final velocity of the object? Solution: Solution:Solution: Solution:Solution: We have be en given that u = 3 m s –1 and v = 7 m s-1, t = 2 s and m = 5 kg. From Eq. (8.5) we have, F ( ) −= m v u t Substitution of values in this relation gives F = 5 kg (7 m s-1 – 3 m s-1)/2 s = 10 N. Now, if this force is applied for a duration of 5 s (t = 5 s), then the final velocity can be calculated by rewriting Eq. (8.5) as = + Ftv u m On substituting the values of u, F, m and t, we get the final velocity, v = 13 m s-1. Fig. 8.8: Fig. 8.8:Fig. 8.8: Fig. 8.8:Fig. 8.8: A fielder pulls his hands gradually with the moving ball while holding a catch.

[Page 8]
SCIENCE94 Exampl e 8.2 Which would require a greater force –– accelerating a 2 kg mass at 5 m s–2 or a 4 kg mass at 2 m s-2 ? Solution: From Eq. (8.4), we have F = ma. Here we have m1 = 2 kg; a1 = 5 m s -2 and m2 = 4 kg; a2 = 2 m s-2. Thus, F1 = m1a1 = 2 kg × 5 m s -2 = 10 N; and F2 = m2a2 = 4 kg × 2 m s -2 = 8 N. ⇒ F1 > F2. Thus, accelerating a 2 kg mass at 5 m s-2 would require a greater force. Example 8.3 A motorcar is moving with a velocity of 108 km/h and it takes 4 s to stop after the brakes ar e applied. Calculate the force exerted by the brakes on the motorcar if its mass along with the passengers is 1000 kg. Solution: The initial velocity of the motorcar u = 108 km/h = 108 × 1000 m/(60 × 60 s) = 30 m s-1 and the final velocity of the motorcar v = 0 m s-1. The total mass of the motorcar along with its passengers = 1000 kg and the time taken to stop the motorcar, t = 4 s. From Eq. (8.5) we have the magnitude of the force (F) applied by the brakes as m(v – u)/t. On substituting the values, we get F = 1000 kg × (0 – 30) m s -1/4 s = – 7500 kg m s-2 or – 7500 N. The negative sign tells us that the force exerted by the brakes is opposite to the direction of motion of the motorcar. Example 8.4 A force of 5 N gives a mass m1, an acceleration of 10 m s –2 and a mass m2, an acceleration of 20 m s -2. What acceleration would it give if both the masses were tied together? Solution: From Eq. (8.4) we have m1 = F/a1; and m2 = F/a2. Here, a1 = 10 m s-2; a2 = 20 m s-2 and F = 5 N. Thus, m1 = 5 N/10 m s-2 = 0.50 kg; and m2 = 5 N/20 m s-2 = 0.25 kg. If the two masses wer e tied together , the total mass, m would be m = 0.50 kg + 0.25 kg = 0.75 kg. The acceleration, a pr oduced in the combined mass by the 5 N force would be, a = F/m = 5 N/0.75 kg = 6.67 m s-2. Example 8.5 The velocity-time graph of a ball of mass 20 g moving along a straight line on a long table is given in Fig. 8.9. Fig. 8.9 How much force does the table exert on the ball to bring it to rest? Solution: The initial velocity of the ball is 20 cm s-1. Due to the frictional force exerted by the table, the velocity of the ball decreases down to zero in 10 s. Thus, u = 20 cm s–1; v = 0 cm s -1 and t = 10 s. Since the velocity-time graph is a straight line, it is clear that the ball moves with a constant acceleration. The acceleration a is −= v ua t = (0 cm s-1 – 20 cm s-1)/10 s = –2 cm s-2 = –0.02 m s-2.