[Page 9]
FORCE AND LAWS OF MOTION 95 The force exerted on the ball F is, F = ma = (20/1000) kg × (– 0.02 m s-2) = – 0.0004 N. The negative sign implies that the frictional force exerted by the table is opposite to the direction of motion of the ball. 8.5 Third Law of Motion The first two laws of motion tell us how an applied force changes the motion and provide us with a method of deter mining the force. The third law of motion states that when one object exerts a force on another object, the second object instantaneously exerts a force back on the first. These two forces are always equal in magnitude but opposite in direction. These forces act on different objects and never on the same object. In the game of football sometimes we, while looking at the football and trying to kick it with a greater force, collide with a player of the opposite team. Both feel hurt because each applies a force to the other. In other wor ds, there is a pair of forces and not just one force. The two opposing forces are also known as action and reaction forces. Let us consider two spring balances connected together as shown in Fig. 8.10. The fixed end of balance B is attached with a rigid support, like a wall. When a force is applied through the free end of spring balance A, it is observed that both the spring balances show the same readings on their scales. It means that the force exerted by spring balance A on balance B is equal but opposite in dir ection to the force exerted by the balance B on balance A. Any of these two forces can be called as action and the other as reaction. This gives us an alternative statement of the third law of motion i.e., to every action there is an equal and opposite r eaction. However, it must be remembered that the action and reaction always act on two different objects, simultaneously. Fig. 8.10: Action and reaction forces are equal and opposite. Suppose you are standing at rest and intend to start walking on a road. You must accelerate, and this r equir es a force in accordance with the second law of motion. Which is this force? Is it the muscular effort you exert on the r oad? Is it in the dir ection we intend to move? No, you push the r oad below backwards. The road exerts an equal and opposite force on your feet to make you move forward. It is important to note that even though the action and r eaction forces ar e always equal in magnitude, these forces may not produce accelerations of equal magnitudes. This is because each force acts on a different object that may have a different mass. When a gun is fired, it exerts a forwar d force on the bullet. The bullet exerts an equal and opposite force on the gun. This results in the recoil of the gun (Fig. 8.11). Since the gun has a much greater mass than the bullet, the acceleration of the gun is much less than the acceleration of the bullet. The third law of motion can also be illustrated when a sailor jumps out of a rowing boat. As the sailor jumps forward, the force on the boat moves it backwards (Fig. 8.12). Fig. 8.11: A forward force on the bullet and recoil of the gun.

[Page 10]
SCIENCE96 What you have learnt • First law of motion: An object continues to be in a state of rest or of uniform motion along a straight line unless acted upon by an unbalanced force. • The natural tendency of objects to resist a change in their state of rest or of uniform motion is called inertia. • The mass of an object is a measure of its inertia. Its SI unit is kilogram (kg). • Force of friction always opposes motion of objects. • Second law of motion: The rate of change of momentum of an object is proportional to the applied unbalanced force in the direction of the force. Activity 8.4 • Request two children to stand on two separate carts as shown in Fig. 8.13. • Give them a bag full of sand or some other heavy object. Ask them to play a game of catch with the bag. • Does each of them experience an instantaneous force as a result of throwing the sand bag? • You can paint a white line on cartwheels to observe the motion of the two carts when the children throw the bag towar ds each other . Fig. 8.12: As the sailor jumps in forward direction, the boat moves backwards. Fig. 8.13 Now, place two children on one cart and one on another cart. The second law of motion can be seen, as this arrangement would show different accelerations for the same force. The cart shown in this activity can be constructed by using a 12 mm or 18 mm thick plywood board of about 50 cm × 100 cm with two pairs of hard ball-bearing wheels (skate wheels are good to use). Skateboards are not as effective because it is difficult to maintain straight-line motion.

[Page 11]
FORCE AND LAWS OF MOTION 97 • The SI unit of force is kg m s–2. This is also known as newton and represented by the symbol N. A force of one newton produces an acceleration of 1 m s –2 on an object of mass 1 kg. • The momentum of an object is the product of its mass and velocity and has the same direction as that of the velocity. Its SI unit is kg m s –1. • Third law of motion: To every action, there is an equal and opposite reaction and they act on two different bodies. Exercises 1. An object experiences a net zero external unbalanced force. Is it possible for the object to be travelling with a non-zero velocity? If yes, state the conditions that must be placed on 2. When a carpet is beaten with a stick, dust comes out of it, Explain. 3. Why is it advised to tie any luggage kept on the roof of a bus with a rope? 4. A batsman hits a cricket ball which then rolls on a level ground. After covering a short distance, the ball comes to rest. The ball slows to a stop because (a) the batsman did not hit the ball hard enough. (b) velocity is proportional to the force exerted on the ball. (c) there is a force on the ball opposing the motion. (d) there is no unbalanced force on the ball, so the ball would want to come to rest. 5. A truck starts from rest and rolls down a hill with a constant acceleration. It travels a distance of 400 m in 20 s. Find its acceleration. Find the force acting on it if its mass is 7 tonnes (Hint: 1 tonne = 1000 kg.) 6. A stone of 1 kg is thrown with a velocity of 20 m s –1 across the frozen surface of a lake and comes to rest after travelling a distance of 50 m. What is the force of friction between the stone and the ice? 7. A 8000 kg engine pulls a train of 5 wagons, each of 2000 kg, along a horizontal track. If the engine exerts a force of 40000 N and the track offers a friction force of 5000 N, then calculate: (a) the net accelerating force and (b) the acceleration of the train. 8. An automobile vehicle has a mass of 1500 kg. What must be the force between the vehicle and road if the vehicle is to be

[Page 12]
SCIENCE98 stopped with a negative acceleration of 1.7 m s –2? 9. What is the momentum of an object of mass m, moving with a velocity v ? (a) ( mv)2 (b) mv2 (c) ½ mv2 (d) mv 10. Using a horizontal force of 200 N, we intend to move a wooden cabinet across a floor at a constant velocity. What is the friction force that will be exerted on the cabinet? 11. According to the third law of motion when we push on an object, the object pushes back on us with an equal and opposite force. If the object is a massive truck parked along the roadside, it will probably not move. A student justifies this by answering that the two opposite and equal forces cancel each other . Comment on this logic and explain why the truck does not move. 12. A hockey ball of mass 200 g travelling at 10 m s –1 is struck by a hockey stick so as to return it along its original path with a velocity at 5 m s –1. Calculate the magnitude of change of momentum occurred in the motion of the hockey ball by the force applied by the hockey stick. 13. A bullet of mass 10 g travelling horizontally with a velocity of 150 m s –1 strikes a stationary wooden block and comes to rest in 0.03 s. Calculate the distance of penetration of the bullet into the block. Also calculate the magnitude of the force exerted by the wooden block on the bullet. 14. An object of mass 1 kg travelling in a straight line with a velocity of 10 m s –1 collides with, and sticks to, a stationary wooden block of mass 5 kg. Then they both move off together in the same straight line. Calculate the total momentum just before the impact and just after the impact. Also, calculate the velocity of the combined object. 15. An object of mass 100 kg is accelerated uniformly from a velocity of 5 m s –1 to 8 m s –1 in 6 s. Calculate the initial and final momentum of the object. Also, find the magnitude of the force exerted on the object. 16. Akhtar, Kiran and Rahul wer e riding in a motor car that was moving with a high velocity on an expressway when an insect hit the windshield and got stuck on the windscreen. Akhtar and Kiran started pondering over the situation. Kiran suggested that the insect suffered a greater change in momentum as compared to the change in momentum of the motorcar (because the change in the velocity of the insect was much more than that of the motorcar). Akhtar said that since the motorcar was moving with a larger velocity, it exerted a larger force on the insect. And as a result the insect died. Rahul while putting an entirely new explanation

[Page 13]
FORCE AND LAWS OF MOTION 99 said that both the motorcar and the insect experienced the same force and a change in their momentum. Comment on these suggestions. 17. How much momentum will a dumb-bell of mass 10 kg transfer to the floor if it falls from a height of 80 cm? Take its downward acceleration to be 10 m s –2. Additional Exercises A1. The following is the distance-time table of an object in motion: Time in seconds Distance in metres 0 0 1 1 2 8 3 27 4 64 5 125 6 216 7 343 (a) What conclusion can you draw about the acceleration? Is it constant, increasing, decreasing, or zero? (b) What do you infer about the forces acting on the object? A2. Two persons manage to push a motorcar of mass 1200 kg at a uniform velocity along a level road. The same motorcar can be pushed by three persons to produce an acceleration of 0.2 m s -2. With what force does each person push the motorcar? (Assume that all persons push the motorcar with the same muscular effort.) A3. A hammer of mass 500 g, moving at 50 m s -1, strikes a nail. The nail stops the hammer in a very short time of 0.01 s. What is the force of the nail on the hammer? A4. A motorcar of mass 1200 kg is moving along a straight line with a uniform velocity of 90 km/h. Its velocity is slowed down to 18 km/h in 4 s by an unbalanced external force. Calculate the acceleration and change in momentum. Also calculate the magnitude of the force required.