[Page 1]
In the pr evious chapter , we described the motion of an object along a straight line in terms of its position, velocity and acceleration. We saw that such a motion can be unifor m or non-uniform. We have not yet discovered what causes the motion. Why does the speed of an object change with time? Do all motions require a cause? If so, what is the nature of this cause? In this chapter we shall make an attempt to quench all such curiosities. For many centuries, the pr oblem of motion and its causes had puzzled scientists and philosophers. A ball on the ground, when given a small hit, does not move forever. Such observations suggest that r est is the “natural state” of an object. This r emained the belief until Galileo Galilei and Isaac Newton developed an entir ely different approach to understand motion. In our everyday life we observe that some effort is r equired to put a stationary object into motion or to stop a moving object. W e ordinarily experience this as a muscular effort and say that we must push or hit or pull on an object to change its state of motion. The concept of force is based on this push, hit or pull. Let us now ponder about a ‘force’. What is it? In fact, no one has seen, tasted or felt a force. However, we always see or feel the effect of a force. It can only be explained by describing what happens when a force is applied to an object. Pushing, hitting and pulling of objects ar e all ways of bringing objects in motion (Fig. 8.1). They move because we make a force act on them. From your studies in earlier classes, you are also familiar with the fact that a force can be used to change the magnitude of velocity of an object (that is, to make the object move faster or slower) or to change its direction of motion. We also know that a force can change the shape and size of objects (Fig. 8.2). (a) The trolley moves along the direction we push it. (c) The hockey stick hits the ball forward (b) The drawer is pulled. Fig. 8.1: Pushing, pulling, or hitting objects change their state of motion. (a) (b) Fig. 8.2: (a) A spring expands on application of force; (b) A spherical rubber ball becomes oblong as we apply force on it. 8 F FF FFORCE ORCEORCE ORCEORCE AND ANDAND ANDAND L L L L LAWS AWSAWS AWSAWS OF OFOF OFOF M M M M MOTION OTIONOTION OTIONOTION C hapter

[Page 2]
SCIENCE88 box with a small force, the box does not move because of friction acting in a dir ection opposite to the push [Fig. 8.4(a)]. This friction force arises between two surfaces in contact; in this case, between the bottom of the box and floor’s r ough sur face. It balances the pushing force and therefore the box does not move. In Fig. 8.4(b), the children push the box harder but the box still does not move. This is because the friction force still balances the pushing force. If the children push the box harder still, the pushing force becomes bigger than the friction force [Fig. 8.4(c)]. There is an unbalanced force. So the box starts moving. What happens when we ride a bicycle? When we stop pedalling, the bicycle begins to slow down. This is again because of the friction forces acting opposite to the direction of motion. In order to keep the bicycle moving, we have to start pedalling again. It thus appears that an object maintains its motion under the continuous application of an unbalanced force. However , it is quite incorrect. An object moves with a unifor m velocity when the forces (pushing force and frictional force) acting on the object ar e balanced and ther e is no net exter nal force on it. If an unbalanced force is applied on the object, there will be a change either in its speed or in the direction of its motion. Thus, to accelerate the motion of an object, an unbalanced force is required. And the change in its speed (or in the dir ection of motion) would continue as long as this unbalanced force is applied. However , if this force is 8.1 Balanced and Unbalanced Forces Fig. 8.3 shows a wooden block on a horizontal table. Two strings X and Y are tied to the two opposite faces of the block as shown. If we apply a force by pulling the string X, the block begins to move to the right. Similarly, if we pull the string Y, the block moves to the left. But, if the block is pulled from both the sides with equal forces, the block will not move. Such forces are called balanced forces and do not change the state of rest or of motion of an object. Now, let us consider a situation in which two opposite forces of different magnitudes pull the block. In this case, the block would begin to move in the direction of the greater force. Thus, the two forces ar e not balanced and the unbalanced force acts in the dir ection the block moves. This suggests that an unbalanced force acting on an object brings it in motion. Fig. 8.3: Two forces acting on a wooden block What happens when some children try to push a box on a rough floor? If they push the (a) (b) (c) Fig. 8.4

[Page 3]
FORCE AND LAWS OF MOTION 89 removed completely, the object would continue to move with the velocity it has acquired till then. 8.2 First Law of Motion By observing the motion of objects on an inclined plane Galileo deduced that objects move with a constant speed when no force acts on them. He observed that when a marble rolls down an inclined plane, its velocity increases [Fig. 8.5(a)]. In the next chapter, you will learn that the marble falls under the unbalanced force of gravity as it r olls down and attains a definite velocity by the time it reaches the bottom. Its velocity decreases when it climbs up as shown in Fig. 8.5(b). Fig. 8.5(c) shows a marble resting on an ideal frictionless plane inclined on both sides. Galileo ar gued that when the marble is released from left, it would roll down the slope and go up on the opposite side to the same height fr om which it was r eleased. If the inclinations of the planes on both sides ar e equal then the marble will climb the same distance that it covered while rolling down. If the angle of inclination of the right-side plane were gradually decr eased, then the marble would travel further distances till it reaches the original height. If the right-side plane were ultimately made horizontal (that is, the slope is reduced to zero), the marble would continue to travel for ever trying to reach the same height that it was r eleased fr om. The unbalanced forces on the marble in this case are zero. It thus suggests that an unbalanced (external) force is r equired to change the motion of the marble but no net force is needed to sustain the uniform motion of the marble. In practical situations it is dif ficult to achieve a zer o unbalanced force. This is because of the presence of the frictional force acting opposite to the dir ection of motion. Thus, in practice the marble stops after travelling some distance. The ef fect of the frictional force may be minimised by using a smooth marble and a smooth plane and providing a lubricant on top of the planes. Fig. 8.5: (a) the downward motion; (b) the upward motion of a marble on an inclined plane; and (c) on a double inclined plane. Newton further studied Galileo’s ideas on force and motion and pr esented thr ee fundamental laws that govern the motion of objects. These thr ee laws ar e known as Newton’s laws of motion. The first law of motion is stated as: An object remains in a state of rest or of unifor m motion in a straight line unless compelled to change that state by an applied force. In other words, all objects resist a change in their state of motion. In a qualitative way, the tendency of undisturbed objects to stay at r est or to keep moving with the same velocity is called inertia. This is why, the first law of motion is also known as the law of inertia. Certain experiences that we come across while travelling in a motor car can be explained on the basis of the law of inertia. We tend to remain at rest with respect to the seat until the driver applies a braking force to stop the motorcar. With the application of brakes, the car slows down but our body tends to continue in the same state of motion because of its inertia. A sudden application of brakes may thus cause injury to us by impact

[Page 4]
SCIENCE90 or collision with the panels in front. Safety belts are worn to prevent such accidents. Safety belts exert a force on our body to make the forward motion slower . An opposite experience is encountered when we are standing in a bus and the bus begins to move suddenly. Now we tend to fall backwards. This is because the sudden start of the bus brings motion to the bus as well as to our feet in contact with the floor of the bus. But the rest of our body opposes this motion because of its inertia. When a motorcar makes a sharp turn at a high speed, we tend to get thrown to one side. This can again be explained on the basis of the law of inertia. We tend to continue in our straight-line motion. When an unbalanced force is applied by the engine to change the direction of motion of the motorcar, we slip to one side of the seat due to the inertia of our body. The fact that a body will remain at rest unless acted upon by an unbalanced force can be illustrated through the following activities: Activity 8.1 • Make a pile of similar carom coins on a table, as shown in Fig. 8.6. • Attempt a sharp horizontal hit at the bottom of the pile using another carom coin or the striker. If the hit is str ong enough, the bottom coin moves out quickly. Once the lowest coin is removed, the inertia of the other coins makes them ‘fall’ vertically on the table. Galileo Galilei was born on 15 February 1564 in Pisa, Italy. Galileo, right from his childhood, had interest in mathematics and natural philosophy. But his father Vincenzo Galilei wanted him to become a medical doctor . Accor dingly, Galileo enr olled himself for a medical degree at the University of Pisa in 1581 which he never completed because of his r eal inter est in mathematics. In 1586, he wr ote his first scientific book ‘The Little Balance [La Balancitta ]’, in which he described Archimedes’ method of finding the relative densities (or specific gravities) of substances using a balance. In 1589, in his series of essays – De Motu, he presented his theories about falling objects using an inclined plane to slow down the rate of descent. In 1592, he was appointed pr ofessor of mathematics at the University of Padua in the Republic of Venice. Here he continued his observations on the theory of motion and through his study of inclined planes and the pendulum, for mulated the corr ect law for unifor mly accelerated objects that the distance the object moves is pr oportional to the squar e of the time taken. Galileo was also a remarkable craftsman. He developed a series of telescopes whose optical performance was much better than that of other telescopes available during those days. Ar ound 1640, he designed the first pendulum clock. In his book ‘Starry Messenger’ on his astronomical discoveries, Galileo claimed to have seen mountains on the moon, the milky way made up of tiny stars, and four small bodies orbiting Jupiter. In his books ‘Discourse on Floating Bodies’ and ‘Letters on the Sunspots’ , he disclosed his observations of sunspots. Using his own telescopes and through his observations on Satur n and Venus, Galileo argued that all the planets must orbit the Sun and not the earth, contrary to what was believed at that time. Galileo Galilei (1564 – 1642) Fig. 8.6: Only the carom coin at the bottom of a pile is removed when a fast moving carom coin (or striker) hits it.