[Page 1]
In the pr evious chapter , we described the motion of an object along a straight line in terms of its position, velocity and acceleration. We saw that such a motion can be unifor m or non-uniform. We have not yet discovered what causes the motion. Why does the speed of an object change with time? Do all motions require a cause? If so, what is the natur e of this cause? In this chapter we shall make an attempt to quench all such curiosities. For many centuries, the pr oblem of motion and its causes had puzzled scientists and philosophers. A ball on the ground, when given a small hit, does not move forever. Such observations suggest that r est is the “natural state” of an object. This r emained the belief until Galileo Galilei and Isaac Newton developed an entir ely different approach to understand motion. In our everyday life we observe that some effort is r equired to put a stationary object into motion or to stop a moving object. W e ordinarily experience this as a muscular effort and say that we must push or hit or pull on an object to change its state of motion. The concept of force is based on this push, hit or pull. Let us now ponder about a ‘force’. What is it? In fact, no one has seen, tasted or felt a force. However, we always see or feel the effect of a force. It can only be explained by describing what happens when a for ce is applied to an object. Pushing, hitting and pulling of objects ar e all ways of bringing objects in motion (Fig. 8.1). They move because we make a force act on them. From your studies in earlier classes, you are also familiar with the fact that a force can be used to change the magnitude of velocity of an object (that is, to make the object move faster or slower) or to change its direction of motion. We also know that a force can change the shape and size of objects (Fig. 8.2). (a) The trolley moves along the direction we push it. (c) The hockey stick hits the ball forward (b) The drawer is pulled. Fig. 8.1: Pushing, pulling, or hitting objects change their state of motion. (a) (b) Fig. 8.2: (a) A spring expands on application of force; (b) A spherical rubber ball becomes oblong as we apply force on it. 8 F FF FFORCE ORCEORCE ORCEORCE AND ANDAND ANDAND L L L L LAWS AWSAWS AWSAWS OF OFOF OFOF M M M M MOTION OTIONOTION OTIONOTION C hapter Reprint 2025-26
=z Pere C hapter 8 Ole ForcE AND Laws or MOTION In the previous chapter, we described the In our everyday life we observe that some motion of an object along a straight line in — effort is required to put a stationary object terms of its position, velocity and acceleration. into motion or to stop a moving object. We We saw that such a motion can be uniform — ordinarily experience this as a muscular effort or non-uniform. We have not yet discovered — and say that we must push or hit or pull on what causes the motion. Why does the speed — an object to change its state of motion. The of an object change with time? Do all motions — concept of force is based on this push, hit or require a cause? If so, what is the nature of — pull. Let us now ponder about a ‘force’. What this cause? In this chapter we shall make an __ is it? In fact, no one has seen, tasted or felt a attempt to quench all such curiosities. force. However, we always see or feel the effect For many centuries, the problem of | of a force. It can only be explained by motion and its causes had puzzled scientists | describing what happens when a force is and philosophers. A ballon the ground. when — applied to an object. Pushing, hitting and given a small hit. does not move forever. Such — pulling of objects are all ways of bringing observations suggest that restis the “natural — objects in motion (Fig. 8.1). They move because state” of an object. This remained the belief | we make a force act on them. until Galileo Galilei and Isaac Newton From your studies in earlier classes. you developed an entirely different approach to — are also familiar with the fact that a force can understand motion. be used to change the magnitude of velocity of an object (that is, to make the object move faster or slower) or to change its direction of oa _ motion, We also know that a force can change eer ey ey the shape and size of objects (Fig. 8.2). mm iti hey ae we fi ow ° <_— — fal The trolley moves along the fb) The drawer is pulled. — TKK direction we push tt fa} (0 The hockey stick hits the ball torward Pig. 8.2: (a) A spring expands on application of force: Pig. 8.12 Pushing, pulling, or hitting objects change (b) A spherical rubber ball becomes oblong their state of motion. as we apply force ort it, Reprint 2025-26

[Page 2]
SCIENCE88 box with a small force, the box does not move because of friction acting in a dir ection opposite to the push [Fig. 8.4(a)]. This friction force arises between two surfaces in contact; in this case, between the bottom of the box and floor’s r ough sur face. It balances the pushing force and therefore the box does not move. In Fig. 8.4(b), the children push the box harder but the box still does not move. This is because the friction force still balances the pushing force. If the children push the box harder still, the pushing force becomes bigger than the friction force [Fig. 8.4(c)]. There is an unbalanced force. So the box starts moving. What happens when we ride a bicycle? When we stop pedalling, the bicycle begins to slow down. This is again because of the friction forces acting opposite to the direction of motion. In order to keep the bicycle moving, we have to start pedalling again. It thus appears that an object maintains its motion under the continuous application of an unbalanced for ce. However , it is quite incorrect. An object moves with a unifor m velocity when the for ces (pushing force and frictional for ce) acting on the object ar e balanced and ther e is no net exter nal force on it. If an unbalanced for ce is applied on the object, there will be a change either in its speed or in the direction of its motion. Thus, to accelerate the motion of an object, an unbalanced force is required. And the change in its speed (or in the dir ection of motion) would continue as long as this unbalanced force is applied. However , if this for ce is 8.1 Balanced and Unbalanced Forces Fig. 8.3 shows a wooden block on a horizontal table. Two strings X and Y are tied to the two opposite faces of the block as shown. If we apply a force by pulling the string X, the block begins to move to the right. Similarly, if we pull the string Y, the block moves to the left. But, if the block is pulled from both the sides with equal for ces, the block will not move. Such forces are called balanced for ces and do not change the state of rest or of motion of an object. Now, let us consider a situation in which two opposite for ces of dif ferent magnitudes pull the block. In this case, the block would begin to move in the direction of the gr eater force. Thus, the two for ces ar e not balanced and the unbalanced force acts in the dir ection the block moves. This suggests that an unbalanced force acting on an object brings it in motion. Fig. 8.3: Two forces acting on a wooden block What happens when some children try to push a box on a rough floor? If they push the (a) (b) (c) Fig. 8.4 Reprint 2025-26
8.1 Balanced and Unbalanced = x with a small force. the box does not move because of friction acting in a direction Forces opposite to the push (Fig. 8.4(a)]. This friction Fig. 8.3 shows a wooden block on a horizontal force arises between two surfaces in contact: table. Two strings X and ¥ are tied to the two in this case, between the bottom of the box opposite faces of the block as shown. If we and Noor’s rough surface. Mt balances the apply a force by pulling the string X. the block pushing force and therefore the box does not begins to move to the right. Similarly. if we move. In Fig. 8.4(b), the children push the box pull the string Y. the block moves to the left. harder but the box still does not move. This is But. if the block is pulled from both the sides because the friction force still balances the with equal forces, the block will not move. pushing force. If the children push the box Such forces are called balanced forces and harder silll, the pushing force becomes bigger do not change the state of rest or of motion of than the friction force [F ig. 8.4{c)]. an object. Now, let us consider a situation in There is an unbalanced force. So the box which two opposite forces of different starts moving. : magnitudes pull the block. In this case, the What happens when we ride a bicycle? block would begin to move in the direction of When we stop pedalling. the bicycle begins the greater force. Thus, the two forces are to slow down. This is again because of the not balanced and the unbalanced force acts __ Tiction forces acting opposite to the direction in the direction the block moves. This | ©f motion. In order to keep the bicycle moving, suggests that an unbalanced force acting on — We have to start pedalling again. It thus an object brings it in motion. appears that an object maintains its motion under the continuous application of an — — unbalanced force. However, it is quite Too, incorrect, An object moves with a uniform ee velocity when the forces (pushing force and frictional force) acting on the object are balanced and there is no net external force on it. If an unbalanced force is applied on the object, there will be a change either in its speed or in the direction of its motion. Thus, to accelerate the motion of an object. an Fig. 8.3: Two forces acting on a wooden block unbalanced force is required. And the change in its speed {or in the direction of motion) What happens when some children try to would continue as long as this unbalanced push a box on a rough floor? Ifthey push the — force is applied. However, if this force is re fp Qo Peg) GB ee Lo VAL ASG| BDHWTAT| Ioan te (aa) if) (qd Fig. 8.4 88 Science. : Reprint 2025-26