[Page 3]
FORCE AND LAWS OF MOTION 89 removed completely, the object would continue to move with the velocity it has acquired till then. 8.2 First Law of Motion By observing the motion of objects on an inclined plane Galileo deduced that objects move with a constant speed when no for ce acts on them. He observed that when a marble rolls down an inclined plane, its velocity increases [Fig. 8.5(a)]. In the next chapter, you will learn that the marble falls under the unbalanced for ce of gravity as it r olls down and attains a definite velocity by the time it reaches the bottom. Its velocity decreases when it climbs up as shown in Fig. 8.5(b). Fig. 8.5(c) shows a marble resting on an ideal frictionless plane inclined on both sides. Galileo ar gued that when the marble is released from left, it would roll down the slope and go up on the opposite side to the same height fr om which it was r eleased. If the inclinations of the planes on both sides ar e equal then the marble will climb the same distance that it covered while rolling down. If the angle of inclination of the right-side plane were gradually decr eased, then the marble would travel further distances till it r eaches the original height. If the right-side plane were ultimately made horizontal (that is, the slope is reduced to zero), the marble would continue to travel for ever trying to r each the same height that it was r eleased fr om. The unbalanced forces on the marble in this case are zero. It thus suggests that an unbalanced (external) for ce is r equired to change the motion of the marble but no net for ce is needed to sustain the uniform motion of the marble. In practical situations it is dif ficult to achieve a zer o unbalanced for ce. This is because of the presence of the frictional force acting opposite to the dir ection of motion. Thus, in practice the marble stops after travelling some distance. The ef fect of the frictional force may be minimised by using a smooth marble and a smooth plane and providing a lubricant on top of the planes. Fig. 8.5: (a) the downward motion; (b) the upward motion of a marble on an inclined plane; and (c) on a double inclined plane. Newton further studied Galileo’s ideas on for ce and motion and pr esented thr ee fundamental laws that govern the motion of objects. These thr ee laws ar e known as Newton’s laws of motion. The first law of motion is stated as: An object remains in a state of rest or of unifor m motion in a straight line unless compelled to change that state by an applied force. In other words, all objects resist a change in their state of motion. In a qualitative way, the tendency of undisturbed objects to stay at r est or to keep moving with the same velocity is called inertia. This is why, the first law of motion is also known as the law of inertia. Certain experiences that we come across while travelling in a motor car can be explained on the basis of the law of inertia. We tend to remain at rest with respect to the seat until the driver applies a braking for ce to stop the motorcar. With the application of brakes, the car slows down but our body tends to continue in the same state of motion because of its inertia. A sudden application of brakes may thus cause injury to us by impact Reprint 2025-26
removed completely, the object would continue to move with the velocity it has acquired ull then. 8.2 First Law of Motion By observing the motion of objects on an fa) () inclined plane Galileo deduced that objects move with a constant speed when no force acts on them. He observed that when a marble rolls down an inclined plane, its velocity NY increases (Fig. 8.5(a)]. In the next chapter, you will learn that the marble falls under the unbalanced force of gravity as it rolls down yy GEILE and attains a definite velocity by the time it reaches the bottom. Its velocity decreases —. when it climbs up as shown in Fig. 8.5(b). {cl Fig. 8.5(c) shows a marble resting on an ideal frictionless plane inclined on both sides. Fig. 8.5: (a) the downward motion: (bh) the upward Galileo argued that when the marble is motion of a marble on an inclined plane: released from left. it would roll down the slope and (c}on a double inclined plane. and Ko uP on the Opposite side to the same Newton further studied Galileo's ideas on eight from which it was released. If the . . pen “dee force and motion and presented three inclinations of the planes on both sides are fundamental laws that govern the motion of equal then the marble will climb the same biects. These three laws are known as distance that it covered while rolling down. If objec Is. * aan ve ae ° Newton's laws of motion. The first law of the angle of inclination of the right-side plane motion is stated as: were gradually decreased, then the marble An object remains in a state of rest or of would travel further distances ull it reaches Uniform motion in a straight line unless the original height. Ifthe right-side plane were compelled to change that state by an ultimately made horizontal (that is, the slope applied force. , . is reduced to zero), the marble would continue In other words, all objects resist a change to travel forever trying to reach the same in their stafe of motion. In a qualitative way, height that it was released from. The the tendency of undisturbed objects to stay unbalanced forces on the marble in this case — at rest or to keep moving with the same are zero. It thus suggests that an unbalanced velocity is called inertia. This is why, the first (external) force is required to change the law of motion is also known as the law motion of the marble but no net force is of inertia. needed to sustain the uniform motion of the Certain experiences that we come across marble. In practical situations it is difficult while travelling in a motorcar can be to achieve a zero unbalanced force. This is explained on the basis of the law of inertia. because of the presence of the frictional force — We tend to remain at rest with respect to the acting opposite to the direction of motion. — seat until the driver applies a braking force Thus, in practice the marble stops after — to stop the motorear. With the application of travelling some distance. The effect of the — brakes, the car slows down but our body frictional force may be minimised by using a tends to continue in the same state of motion smooth marble and a smooth plane and because of its inertia. A sudden application of providing a lubricant on top of the planes. brakes may thus cause injury to us by impact Foxes, aso Las or Monox 89 Reprint 2025-26 :

[Page 4]
SCIENCE90 or collision with the panels in front. Safety belts are worn to prevent such accidents. Safety belts exert a force on our body to make the forward motion slower . An opposite experience is encountered when we are standing in a bus and the bus begins to move suddenly. Now we tend to fall backwards. This is because the sudden start of the bus brings motion to the bus as well as to our feet in contact with the floor of the bus. But the rest of our body opposes this motion because of its inertia. When a motorcar makes a sharp turn at a high speed, we tend to get thrown to one side. This can again be explained on the basis of the law of inertia. We tend to continue in our straight-line motion. When an unbalanced force is applied by the engine to change the direction of motion of the motorcar, we slip to one side of the seat due to the inertia of our body. The fact that a body will remain at rest unless acted upon by an unbalanced for ce can be illustrated through the following activities: Activity ______________ 8.1 • Make a pile of similar carom coins on a table, as shown in Fig. 8.6. • Attempt a sharp horizontal hit at the bottom of the pile using another carom coin or the striker. If the hit is str ong enough, the bottom coin moves out quickly. Once the lowest coin is removed, the inertia of the other coins makes them ‘fall’ vertically on the table. Galileo Galilei was born on 15 February 1564 in Pisa, Italy. Galileo, right from his childhood, had interest in mathematics and natural philosophy. But his father Vincenzo Galilei wanted him to become a medical doctor . Accor dingly, Galileo enr olled himself for a medical degree at the University of Pisa in 1581 which he never completed because of his r eal inter est in mathematics. In 1586, he wr ote his first scientific book ‘The Little Balance [La Balancitta ]’, in which he described Archimedes’ method of finding the relative densities (or specific gravities) of substances using a balance. In 1589, in his series of essays – De Motu, he presented his theories about falling objects using an inclined plane to slow down the rate of descent. In 1592, he was appointed pr ofessor of mathematics at the University of Padua in the Republic of Venice. Here he continued his observations on the theory of motion and through his study of inclined planes and the pendulum, for mulated the corr ect law for unifor mly accelerated objects that the distance the object moves is pr oportional to the squar e of the time taken. Galileo was also a remarkable craftsman. He developed a series of telescopes whose optical performance was much better than that of other telescopes available during those days. Ar ound 1640, he designed the first pendulum clock. In his book ‘Starry Messenger’ on his astronomical discoveries, Galileo claimed to have seen mountains on the moon, the milky way made up of tiny stars, and four small bodies orbiting Jupiter. In his books ‘Discourse on Floating Bodies’ and ‘Letters on the Sunspots’ , he disclosed his observations of sunspots. Using his own telescopes and through his observations on Satur n and Venus, Galileo argued that all the planets must orbit the Sun and not the earth, contrary to what was believed at that time. Galileo Galilei (1564 – 1642) Fig. 8.6: Only the carom coin at the bottom of a pile is removed when a fast moving carom coin (or striker) hits it. Reprint 2025-26
Galileo Galilei was born SEE To or collision with the panels in front. Safety belts on 15 February 1564 in ee " are worn to prevent such accidents. Safety belts Pisa, Italy. Galileo, right Bras exert a force on our body to make the forward from his childhood, had }* Se . d motion slower. An opposite experience is interest in mathematics [27 ~. g) encountered when we are standing in a bus and natural philosophy. |v; z and the bus begins to move suddenly. Now But his father ["Zg , we tend to fall backwards. This is because the Vincenzo Galilei wanted a7 7 sudden start of the bus brings motion to the him to become a medical [ APA os owes bus as well as to our feet in contact with the doctor. Accordingly. : lilo Galtlel floor of the bus. But the rest of our body Galileo enrolled himself (1564 - 1642) opposes this motion because of its inertia. fora medical degree at the When a motorcar makes a sharp turn ata University of Pisa in 1581 which he never high speed. we tend to get thrown to one side. completed beeause of his real interest in This can again be explained on the basis of mathematics. In 1586, he wrote his first i . scientific hook ‘The Little Balance [La the law of inertia. We tend to continue in our Balaneittay, in which he described straight-line motion. When an unbalanced Archimedes’ method of finding the relative force is applied by the engine to change the densities (or specific gravities) of substances direction of motion of the motorcar, we slip to using a balance. In 1589. in his series of one side of the seat due to the inertia of essays — De Moti, he presented his theories our body. about falling objects using an inclined plane The fact that a body will remain at rest to slow down the rate of descent. unless acted upon by an unbalanced force In 1592, he was appointed professor of can be illustrated through — the mathematics at the University of Padua in following activities: the Republic of Venice. Here he continued his observations on the theory of motion and Activity 8.1 through his study of inclined planes and the pendulum, formulated the correct law tor ¢ Make a pile of similar carom coins on uniformly accelerated objects that the a table, as shown in Fig. 8.6. distance the object moves is proportional to ¢ — Attempt a sharp horizontal hit at the the square of the time taken. hottom of the pile using another carom Galileo was also a remarkable craftsman. coin or the striker. If the hit is strong He developed a series of telescopes whose enough, the bottom coin moves out optical performance was much better than quickly. Once the lowest coin ts that of other telescopes available during those removed, the inertia ot the other coins days. Around 1640, he designed the first makes them ‘fall’ vertically on the pendulum clock. In his book ‘Starry table. Messenger’ on his astronomical discoveries, Galileo claimed to have seen mountains on the moon, the milky way made up of tiny Gs stars, and four small bodies orbiting Jupiter. iC 7 a . a f In his books ‘Discourse on Floating Bodics’ i 7, (a = and ‘Letters on the Sunspots, he disclosed his observations of sunspots. SS Using his own telescopes and through his (I [I observations on Saturn and Venus, Galileo argued that all the planets must orbit the Sun . . . . . . Fig. 8.6. Only the carom coin at the bottom of a and not the carth, contrary to what was : pile is removed when a fast moving caront believed at that time. coin for striker} hits it. 30 Science. : Reprint 2025-26