[Page 5]
FORCE AND LAWS OF MOTION 91 five-rupees coin if we use a one-rupee coin, we find that a lesser force is required to perform the activity. A force that is just enough to cause a small cart to pick up a large velocity will produce a negligible change in the motion of a train. This is because, in comparison to the cart the train has a much lesser tendency to change its state of motion. Accordingly, we say that the train has more inertia than the cart. Clearly, heavier or more massive objects offer larger inertia. Quantitatively, the inertia of an object is measured by its mass. We may thus relate inertia and mass as follows: Inertia is the natural tendency of an object to resist a change in its state of motion or of rest. The mass of an object is a measur e of its inertia. uestions 1. Which of the following has more inertia: (a) a rubber ball and a stone of the same size? (b) a bicycle and a train? (c) a five - rupees coin and a one-rupee coin? 2. In the following example, try to identify the number of times the velocity of the ball changes: “A football player kicks a football to another player of his team who kicks the football towar ds the goal. The goalkeeper of the opposite team collects the football and kicks it towards a player of his own team”. Also identify the agent supplying the force in each case. 3. Explain why some of the leaves may get detached from a tree if we vigorously shake its branch. 4. Why do you fall in the forwar d direction when a moving bus brakes to a stop and fall backwards when it accelerates from rest? 8.4 Second Law of Motion The first law of motion indicates that when an unbalanced external force acts on an object, Activity ______________ 8.2 • Set a five-rupee coin on a stiff card covering an empty glass tumbler standing on a table as shown in Fig. 8.7. • Give the card a sharp horizontal flick with a finger. If we do it fast then the card shoots away, allowing the coin to fall vertically into the glass tumbler due to its inertia. • The inertia of the coin tries to maintain its state of rest even when the card flows off. Fig. 8.7: When the card is flicked with the finger the coin placed over it falls in the tumbler. Activity ______________ 8.3 • Place a water-filled tumbler on a tray. • Hold the tray and turn around as fast as you can. • We observe that the water spills. Why? Observe that a gr oove is pr ovided in a saucer for placing the tea cup. It pr events the cup from toppling over in case of sudden jerks. 8.3 Inertia and Mass All the examples and activities given so far illustrate that there is a resistance offered by an object to change its state of motion. If it is at rest it tends to remain at rest; if it is moving it tends to keep moving. This property of an object is called its inertia. Do all bodies have the same inertia? We know that it is easier to push an empty box than a box full of books. Similarly, if we kick a football it flies away. But if we kick a stone of the same size with equal force, it hardly moves. We may, in fact, get an injury in our foot while doing so! Similarly, in activity 8.2, instead of a Q Reprint 2025-26
Activity 8.2 five-rupees coin if we use a one-rupee coin, we find that a lesser force is required to perform ¢ = Set_a five-rupee coin on a stiff card the activity. A force that is just enough to cause covering an empty glass tumbler a small cart to pick up a large velocity will standing on a table as shown in produce a negligible change in the motion of a Fig. 8.7. train. This is because, in comparison to the . Give the card a sharp horizontal flick age 7 nee . se wae with a finger. If we do it fast then the cart the train has a much lesser tendency to card shoots away. allowing the coin to change its state of motion. Accordingly, we say fall vertically into the glass tumbler due that the train has more inertia than the cart. to its inertia. Clearly, heavier or more massive objects offer e The inertia of the coin tries to larger inertia. Quantitatively, the inertia of an maintain its state of rest even when object is measured by its mass. We may thus the card flows off. relate inertia and mass as follows: fo, me, Inertia is the natural tendency of an object to fg, ae vee ee resist a change in its state of motion or of Sn, Tose ae = rest. The mass of an object is a measure of aa oF its inertia. westions Fig. 8. 7: When the card is flicked with the | 1. Which of the following has more finuter the coin placed over it falls in the . . funbler. inertia: dal acrubber ball and a stone of the same size? (b} a sitet bievele and a train? fe} a tive- Activity 8.3 rupees coin and a OnC-Pupee COL? ¢ Place a water-filled tumbler on a tray. 2. In the following cxaniple, uv to e¢ = Hold the tray and turn around as fast idendify the number of tines the as you can. velocity of the ball changes: ¢ We observe that the water spills. Why? “A foothall plaver Kicks a football toanother plaver of his tcant who Observe that a groove is provided in a Kicks the football towards the saucer for placing the tea cup. It prevents goal. The goalkecper of the the cup from toppling over in case of opposite team collects Hie football sudden jerks. and kicks it towards a plaver of his own tcanr, 8.3 Inertia and Mass Also identity (he agent supplving the force in cach case. All the examples and activities given so far 3 Explain why some of the leaves illustrate that there is a resistance offered by may get detached trom a tee if an object to change its state of motion. If it is Wwe vigorously shake its branch. atrestit tends to remain at rest: if it is moving 4. Why do vou tall in the forward it tends to keep moving. This property of an dircetion when a moving bus object is called its inertia. Do all bodies have brakes to a stop and. fall the same inertia? We know that it is easier to backwards when if accelerates push an empty box than a box full of books. from rest? Similarly, if we kick a football it flies away. But if we kick a stone of the same size with H equal force. it hardly moves. We may, in fact. 8.4 Second Law of Motion get an injury in our foot while doing so! The first law of motion indicates that when an Similarly, in activity 8.2, instead of a unbalanced external force acts on an object, Fores axp Laws o¢ Monon gl Reprint 2025-26 :

[Page 6]
SCIENCE92 92929292 its velocity changes, that is, the object gets an acceleration. We would now like to study how the acceleration of an object depends on the force applied to it and how we measure a force. Let us recount some observations from our everyday life. During the game of table tennis if the ball hits a player it does not hurt him. On the other hand, when a fast moving cricket ball hits a spectator, it may hurt him. A truck at rest does not require any attention when parked along a roadside. But a moving truck, even at speeds as low as 5 m s –1, may kill a person standing in its path. A small mass, such as a bullet may kill a person when fired from a gun. These observations suggest that the impact produced by the objects depends on their mass and velocity. Similarly, if an object is to be accelerated, we know that a greater force is required to give a greater velocity. In other words, there appears to exist some quantity of importance that combines the object’s mass and its velocity. One such property called momentum was introduced by Newton. The momentum, p of an object is defined as the product of its mass, m and velocity, v. That is, p = mv (8.1) Momentum has both direction and magnitude. Its direction is the same as that of velocity, v. The SI unit of momentum is kilogram-metr e per second (kg m s -1). Since the application of an unbalanced force brings a change in the velocity of the object, it is therefore clear that a for ce also pr oduces a change of momentum. Let us consider a situation in which a car with a dead battery is to be pushed along a straight road to give it a speed of 1 m s-1, which is sufficient to start its engine. If one or two persons give a sudden push (unbalanced force) to it, it hardly starts. But a continuous push over some time results in a gradual acceleration of the car to this speed. It means that the change of momentum of the car is not only determined by the magnitude of the force but also by the time during which the force is exerted. It may then also be concluded that the force necessary to change the momentum of an object depends on the time rate at which the momentum is changed. The second law of motion states that the rate of change of momentum of an object is proportional to the applied unbalanced force in the direction of force. 8.4.1 MATHEMATICAL FORMULATION OF SECOND LAW OF MOTION Suppose an object of mass, m is moving along a straight line with an initial velocity, u. It is uniformly accelerated to velocity, v in time, t by the application of a constant for ce, F throughout the time, t. The initial and final momentum of the object will be, p1 = mu and p2 = mv r espectively. The change in momentum ∝ p2 – p1 ∝ mv – mu ∝ m × (v – u). The rate of change of momentum ∝ ( )× −m v u t Or, the applied force, F ∝ ( )× −m v u t ( )× −= km v u t F (8.2) = kma (8.3) Here a ∝ = [(v – u)/t] is the acceleration, which is the rate of change of velocity. The quantity, k is a constant of proportionality. The SI units of mass and acceleration are kg and m s -2 respectively. The unit of force is so chosen that the value of the constant, k becomes one. For this, one unit of force is defined as the amount that produces an acceleration of 1 m s-2 in an object of 1 kg mass. That is, 1 unit of force = k × (1 kg) × (1 m s-2). Thus, the value of k becomes 1. From Eq. (8.3) F = ma (8.4) The unit of force is kg m s -2 or newton, which has the symbol N. The second law of Reprint 2025-26
its velocity changes, that is, the object gets an on the time rate at which the momentum is acceleration. We would now like to study how — changed. the acceleration of an object depends on the The second law of motion states that the force applied to it and how we measure a force. — rate of change of momentum of an object is Let us recount some observations from our — proportional to the applied unbalanced force everyday life. During the game oftable tennis — in the direction of force. if the ball hits a player it does not hurt him. On the other hand, when a fast moving cricket 8.4.1 MATHEMATICAL FORMULATION OF ball hits a spectator, it may hurt him. A truck SECOND LAW OF MOTION at rest does not require any attention when parked along a roadside. But a moving truck, — Suppose an object of mass, mis moving along even at speeds as low as 5m s"', may killa a straight line with an initial velocity, a. It is person standing in its path. A small mass. — uniformly accelerated to velocity, vin time, f such as a bullet may kill a person when fired — by the application of a constant force, F from a gun. These observations suggest that throughout the time, “ The initial and final the impact produced by the objects depends | momentum of the object will be, p, = mu and on their mass and velocity. Similarly. ifan — p, = mv respectively. object is to be accelerated, we know that a The change . . le CHAN ge dn momentui mop, p greater force is required to give a greater anv Ima velocity. In other words, there appears to exist a omx(vou). some quantity of importance that combines the object’s mass and its velocity. One such . . . mx(u ou) ve ine The rate of change of momentum «© property called momentum was introduced by t Newton. The momentum, p of an object is Or, the applied force. defined as the product of its mass. m and velocity, v. That is, rp, 2 x(v_u) p=mv (8.1) t Momentum has both direction and P= fon x(v_u) magnitude. Its direction is the same as that t of velocity, v. The SI unit of momentum is =kma (8.3) kilogram-metre per second (kg m s"'). Since the application of an unbalanced force brings Here a7 = [(v— 19/4] is the acceleration, a change in the velocity of the object, it is which is the rate of change of velocity. The therefore clear that a force also produces a quantity, kis a constant of proportionality. The change of momentum. Sl units of mass and acceleration are kg and Let us consider a situation in which acar —'™_ 8% respectively. The unit of force is so with a dead battery is to be pushed along a chosen that the value of the constant, k straight road to give it a speed of 1 ms", which becomes one. For this, one unit of force is is sufficient to start its engine. [fone or two defined as the amount that produces an persons give a sudden push (unbalanced force) acceleration of 1 ms? inan object of 1 kg mass. to it. it hardly starts. Buta continuous push — That is, over some lime results in a gradual acceleration 1 unit of force = kx (1 kg) « (1 ms”). of the car to this speed. It means that the change of momentum of the car is not only determined — Thus, the value of A becomes 1. From Eq. (8.3) by the magnitude of the force but also by the F-=ma (8.4) time during which the force is exerted. It may then also be concluded that the force necessary The unit of force is kg m s? or newton, to change the momentum of an object depends = which has the symbol N. The second law of 92 Sewn, : Reprint 2025-26