[Page 1]
In the previous few chapters we have talked about ways of describing the motion of objects, the cause of motion and gravitation. Another concept that helps us understand and interpret many natural phenomena is ‘work’. Closely related to work are energy and power. In this chapter we shall study these concepts. All living beings need food. Living beings have to per form several basic activities to survive. We call such activities ‘life processes’. The energy for these pr ocesses comes fr om food. We need energy for other activities like playing, singing, r eading, writing, thinking, jumping, cycling and running. Activities that are strenuous r equire more energy. Animals too get engaged in activities. For example, they may jump and run. They have to fight, move away fr om enemies, find food or find a safe place to live. Also, we engage some animals to lift weights, carry loads, pull carts or plough fields. All such activities require energy. Think of machines. List the machines that you have come across. What do they need for their working? Why do some engines require fuel like petr ol and diesel? Why do living beings and machines need energy? 10.1Work What is work? There is a dif ference in the way we use the term ‘work’ in day-to-day life and the way we use it in science. T o make this point clear let us consider a few examples. 10.1.1NOT MUCH ‘ WORK’ IN SPITE OF WORKING HARD! Kamali is pr eparing for examinations. She spends lot of time in studies. She reads books, draws diagrams, organises her thoughts, collects question papers, attends classes, discusses pr oblems with her friends, and performs experiments. She expends a lot of ener gy on these activities. In common parlance, she is ‘working hard’. All this ‘hard work’ may involve very little ‘work’ if we go by the scientific definition of work. You are working hard to push a huge rock. Let us say the rock does not move despite all the ef fort. Y ou get completely exhausted. However, you have not done any work on the rock as there is no displacement of the rock. You stand still for a few minutes with a heavy load on your head. You get tired. You have exerted yourself and have spent quite a bit of your energy. Are you doing work on the load? The way we understand the term ‘work’ in science, work is not done. You climb up the steps of a staircase and reach the second floor of a building just to see the landscape from there. You may even climb up a tall tree. If we apply the scientific definition, these activities involve a lot of work. In day-to-day life, we consider any useful physical or mental labour as work. Activities like playing in a field, talking with friends, humming a tune, watching a movie, attending a function ar e sometimes not consider ed to be work. What constitutes ‘work’ depends on the way we define it. W e use and define the ter m work dif ferently in science. T o understand this let us do the following activities: Activity _____________ 10.1 • We have discussed in the above paragraphs a number of activities which we normally consider to be work 10 W WW WWORK ORKORK ORKORK AND ANDAND ANDAND E E E E ENERGY NERGYNERGY NERGYNERGY C hapter Reprint 2025-26
Crna pter 10 Ble WorK AND ENERGY In the previous few chapters we have talked = draws diagrams, organises her thoughts, about ways of describing the motion of — collects question papers. attends classes. objects, the cause of motion and gravitation. — discusses problems with her friends, and Another concept that helps us understand and — performs experiments. She expends a lot of interpret many natural phenomena is ‘work’. energy on these activities. In common Closely related to work are energy and power. — parlance, she is ‘working hard’. All this “hard In this chapter we shall study these concepts. — work’ may involve very little ‘work’ if we go by All living beings need food. Living beings — the scientific definition of work. have to perform several basic activities to You are working hard to push a huge rock. survive. We call such activities ‘life processes’. Let us say the rock does not move despite all The energy for these processes comes from — the effort. You get completely exhausted. food. We need energy for other activities like — However, you have not done any work on the playing. singing, reading, writing, thinking. — rock as there is no displacement of the rock. jumping, cycling and running. Activities that You stand still for a few minutes with a are strenuous require more energy. heavy load on your head. You get tired. You Animals too get engaged in activities. For — have exerted yourself and have spent quite a example. they may jump andrun, They have __ bit of your energy. Are you doing work on the to fight. move away from enemies, find food — load? The way we understand the term ‘work’ or find a safe place to live. Also, we engage — in science, work is not done. some animals to lift weights, carry loads, pull You climb up the steps of a staircase and carts or plough fields. All such activities — reach the second floor of a building just to require energy. see the landscape from there. You may even Think of machines. List the machines that — climb up a tall tree. If we apply the scientific you have come across. What do they need for definition, these activities involve a lot of work. their working? Why do some engines require In day-to-day life, we consider any useful fuel like petrol and diesel’? Why do living — physical or mental labour as work. Activities beings and machines need energy? like playing in a field, talking with friends, humming a tune, watching a movie, attending 10.1 Work a function are sometimes not considered to be work. What constitutes ‘work’ depends What is work? There is a difference in the — on the way we define it. We use and define way we use the term ‘work’ in day-to-day life — the term work differently in science. To and the way we use it in science. To make — understand this let us do the following this point clear let us considera fewexamples. — activities: 10.1.1 Not MUCH ‘WORK’ IN SPITE OF Activity 10.1 WORKING HARD! . We have discussed in the above Kamali is preparing for examinations. She paragraphs a number of activities spends lot of time in studies. She reads books, which we normally consider to be work Reprint 2025-26

[Page 2]
SCIENCE114 Activity _____________ 10.3 • Think of situations when the object is not displaced in spite of a force acting on it. • Also think of situations when an object gets displaced in the absence of a force acting on it. • List all the situations that you can think of for each. • Discuss with your friends whether work is done in these situations. 10.1.3WORK DONE BY A CONSTANT FORCE How is work defined in science? T o understand this, we shall first consider the case when the force is acting in the direction of displacement. Let a constant for ce, F act on an object. Let the object be displaced through a distance, s in the direction of the force (Fig. 10.1). Let W be the work done. We define work to be equal to the pr oduct of the for ce and displacement. Work done = force × displacement W = F s (10.1) in day-to-day life. For each of these activities, ask the following questions and answer them: (i) What is the work being done on? (ii) What is happening to the object? (iii) Who (what) is doing the work? 10.1.2SCIENTIFIC CONCEPTION OF WORK To understand the way we view work and define work from the point of view of science, let us consider some situations: Push a pebble lying on a sur face. The pebble moves through a distance. You exerted a for ce on the pebble and the pebble got displaced. In this situation work is done. A girl pulls a trolley and the trolley moves through a distance. The girl has exerted a force on the trolley and it is displaced. Therefore, work is done. Lift a book thr ough a height. T o do this you must apply a for ce. The book rises up. There is a force applied on the book and the book has moved. Hence, work is done. A closer look at the above situations reveals that two conditions need to be satisfied for work to be done: (i) a force should act on an object, and (ii) the object must be displaced. If any one of the above conditions does not exist, work is not done. This is the way we view work in science. A bullock is pulling a cart. The cart moves. There is a force on the cart and the cart has moved. Do you think that work is done in this situation? Activity _____________ 10.2 • Think of some situations from your daily life involving work. • List them. • Discuss with your friends whether work is being done in each situation. • Try to reason out your response. • If work is done, which is the force acting on the object? • What is the object on which the work is done? • What happens to the object on which work is done? Fig. 10.1 Thus, work done by a force acting on an object is equal to the magnitude of the force multiplied by the distance moved in the dir ection of the for ce. W ork has only magnitude and no direction. In Eq. (10.1), if F = 1 N and s = 1 m then the work done by the for ce will be 1 N m. Here the unit of work is newton metre (N m) or joule (J). Thus 1 J is the amount of work Reprint 2025-26
in day-to-day life. For each of these Activity 10.3 activities, ask the following questions TTT . and answer them: . Think of situations when the object (i) What is the work being done on? is not displaced in spite of a force (ii) What is happening to the object? acting on it. (ii) Who (what) is doing the work? . Also think of situations when an object gets displaced in the absence of a force spp Ropr pres ps. saeayer: sae . acting on it. 10.1.2 SCIENTIFIC CONCEPTION OF WORK . List all the situations that you can To understand the way we view work and . unk of for cach. friends whett define work from the point of view of science, wok dene, oe \Inese situations ner let us consider some situations: : —_ - Push a pebble lying on a surface. The . . vee pene pebble moves through a distance. You exerted 10.1.3 WORK DONE BY A CONSTANT a force on the pebble and the pebble got FORCE displaced. In this situation work is done. llow is work defined in science? To h A an Puts trolley and the trolley Meda understand this, we shall first consider the Wrouga a distance. “The girl has exerted @ ase when the force is acting in the direction force on the trolley and it is displaced. Sd. ° Therefore. work is done of displacement. nerelore, WORK 18 Gone. on Let a constant force, Fact on an object. Lift a book through a height. To do this Let the object be displaced through a you must apply a force. The book rises up. distance, s in the direction of the force (Fig. There is a force applied on the book and the 10.1). Let Whe the work done. We define work book has moved. Hence, work is done. to be equal to the product of the force and A closer look at the above situations od displacement. reveals that two conditions need to be Work done = force x displacement satisfied for work to be done: (i) a force should W = Fs xenspl (10.1) act on an object, and (ii) the object must be a . displaced. <—_—_ : ——— > If any one of the above conditions does E at not exist. work is not done. This is the way : we view work in science. A bullock is pulling a cart. The cart moves. There is a force on the cart and the cart has moved. Do you think that work is done in this situation? Activity 10.2 « ‘Think of some situations from your Fig. 10.1 daily life involving work. ¢ last them, Thus, work done by a force acting on an ¢ Discuss with your triends whether object is equal to the magnitude of the force work is being done in each situation. multiplied by the distance moved in the ° Try to reason out your response. - direction of the force. Work has only . If work 1s done, which is the force acting magnitude and no direction . on the object? oe “ . . ® = What is the object on which the work In Eq. (10.1). if F= 1 Nand s= 1m then is done? the work done by the force will be 1 Nm. . What happens to the object on which Here the unit of work is newton metre (N m) work is done? or joule (J). Thus 1 J is the amount of work 114 Science. Reprint 2025-26

[Page 3]
WORK AND ENERGY 115 done on an object when a for ce of 1 N displaces it by 1 m along the line of action of the force. Look at Eq. (10.1) carefully. What is the work done when the for ce on the object is zero? What would be the work done when the displacement of the object is zero? Refer to the conditions that ar e to be satisfied to say that work is done. Example 10.1 A force of 5 N is acting on an object. The object is displaced through 2 m in the direction of the force (Fig. 10.2). If the force acts on the object all through the displacement, then work done is 5 N × 2 m =10 N m or 10 J. Fig. 10.4 Consider a situation in which an object is moving with a uniform velocity along a particular direction. Now a retarding force, F, is applied in the opposite direction. That is, the angle between the two directions is 180º. Let the object stop after a displacement s. In such a situation, the work done by the force, F is taken as negative and denoted by the minus sign. The work done by the force is F × (–s) or (–F × s). It is clear from the above discussion that the work done by a force can be either positive or negative. To understand this, let us do the following activity: Activity _____________ 10.4 • Lift an object up. Work is done by the force exerted by you on the object. The object moves upwar ds. The for ce you exerted is in the dir ection of displacement. However , ther e is the force of gravity acting on the object. • Which one of these for ces is doing positive work? • Which one is doing negative work? • Give reasons. Work done is negative when the force acts opposite to the dir ection of displacement. Work done is positive when the force is in the direction of displacement. Example 10.2 A porter lifts a luggage of 15 kg from the ground and puts it on his head 1.5 m above the ground. Calculate the work done by him on the luggage. Solution: Mass of luggage, m = 15 kg and displacement, s = 1.5 m. Fig. 10.2 uestion 1. A force of 7 N acts on an object. The displacement is, say 8 m, in the dir ection of the for ce (Fig. 10.3). Let us take it that the force acts on the object through the displacement. What is the work done in this case? Fig. 10.3 Consider another situation in which the force and the displacement are in the same direction: a baby pulling a toy car parallel to the ground, as shown in Fig. 10.4. The baby has exerted a for ce in the dir ection of displacement of the car. In this situation, the work done will be equal to the product of the force and displacement. In such situations, the work done by the force is taken as positive. Q Reprint 2025-26
done on an object when a force of 1 N on) displaces it by 1 m along the line of action of go ee . Net) the force. Zornes . 4 5) Look at Eq. (10.1) carefully. What is the work done when the force on the object is (7 a) zero? What would be the work done when om) 3 the displacement of the object is zero? Refer < to the conditions that are to be satisfied to Fig. 10.4 say that work is done. Consider a situation in which an object is NNN moving with a uniform velocity along a Example 10.1 A force of 5 N is acting on particular direction. Now a retarding force, F, an object. The object is displaced is applied in the opposite direction. That is, through 2 m in the direction of the force the angle between the two directions is 180°. (Fig. 10.2). Ifthe force acts on the object Let the object stop after a displacement s. In all through the displacement, then work such a situation, the work done by the force, done is5Nx2m =10ONmor 10d. Fis taken as negative and denoted by the minus sign. The work done by the force is Fx {-s) or (-F’« s). —— 2m — It is clear from the above discussion that 5\—> - CJ the work done by a force can be either positive or negative. To understand this, let us do the Fig. 10.2 following activity: Activity i+: (" vest an . Lift an object up. Work is done by the | \ 1. A force of 7X acts on an object. force exerted by you on the object. The The displacement is, sav 8 m. in object moves upwards. The force you the direction of the force exerted is in the direction of | (Fig. 10.3). Let us take it thatthe displacement. However, there 1s the | force acts on the object Hhrough lorce of gravity acting on the object. U aes ‘ bad . Which one of these forces is doing the displacement What is the positive work? work done in this case? * = Which one is doing negative work? . Give reasons, _ am ————_> Work done is negative when the force acts iN? Fs rT opposite to the direction of displacement. Fig. 10.3 Work done is positive when the force is in the ooo direction of displacement. Consider another situation in which the Example 10.2 A porter lifts a luggage of force and the displacement are in the same 15 kg from the ground and puts it on direction: a baby pulling a toy car parallel to his head 1.5 m above the ground. the ground, as shown in Fig. 10.4. The baby Calculate the work done by him on the has exerted a force in the direction of luggage. displacement of the car. In this situation, the Solution: work done will be equal to the product of the force and displacement. In such situations, Mass of luggage. mr = 15 kg and the work done by the force is taken as positive. displacement, $= 1.5 m. Worn avo Exnrar 115 Reprint 2025-26 :

[Page 4]
SCIENCE116 raised hammer falls on a nail placed on a piece of wood, it drives the nail into the wood. We have also observed children winding a toy (such as a toy car) and when the toy is placed on the floor, it starts moving. When a balloon is filled with air and we press it we notice a change in its shape. As long as we press it gently, it can come back to its original shape when the force is withdrawn. However, if we press the balloon hard, it can even explode producing a blasting sound. In all these examples, the objects acquire, through different means, the capability of doing work. An object having a capability to do work is said to possess energy. The object which does the work loses energy and the object on which the work is done gains energy. How does an object with energy do work? An object that possesses energy can exert a force on another object. When this happens, energy is transferred from the former to the latter. The second object may move as it receives energy and therefore do some work. Thus, the first object had a capacity to do work. This implies that any object that possesses energy can do work. The energy possessed by an object is thus measured in terms of its capacity of doing work. The unit of energy is, therefore, the same as that of work, that is, joule (J). 1 J is the ener gy r equir ed to do 1 joule of work. Sometimes a larger unit of energy called kilo joule (kJ) is used. 1 kJ equals 1000 J. 10.2.1FORMS OF ENERGY Luckily the world we live in provides energy in many different forms. The various forms include mechanical energy (potential energy + kinetic ener gy), heat ener gy, chemical energy, electrical energy and light energy. Think it over ! How do you know that some entity is a form of energy? Discuss with your friends and teachers. Work done, W = F × s = mg × s = 15 kg × 10 m s-2 × 1.5 m = 225 kg m s-2 m = 225 N m = 225 J Work done is 225 J. uestions 1. When do we say that work is done? 2. Write an expression for the work done when a for ce is acting on an object in the direction of its displacement. 3. Define 1 J of work. 4. A pair of bullocks exerts a force of 140 N on a plough. The field being ploughed is 15 m long. How much work is done in ploughing the length of the field? 10.2Energy Life is impossible without energy. The demand for energy is ever incr easing. Where do we get ener gy fr om? The Sun is the biggest natural source of energy to us. Many of our energy sources are derived from the Sun. We can also get energy from the nuclei of atoms, the interior of the earth, and the tides. Can you think of other sources of energy? Activity _____________ 10.5 • A few sources of energy are listed above. There are many other sources of energy. List them. • Discuss in small gr oups how certain sources of energy are due to the Sun. • Are there sources of energy which are not due to the Sun? The word energy is very often used in our daily life, but in science we give it a definite and pr ecise meaning. Let us consider the following examples: when a fast moving cricket ball hits a stationary wicket, the wicket is thr own away. Similarly, an object when raised to a certain height gets the capability to do work. You must have seen that when a Q Reprint 2025-26
Work done, Wo= Fx s= mex s raised hammer falls on a nail placed on a piece = 15kgx10ms’x 1.5m of wood, it drives the nail into the wood. We = 225kgms?m have also observed children winding a toy = 225Nm= 225J (such as a toy car) and when the toy is placed Work done is 225 J. on the floor, it starts moving. When a balloon is filled with air and we press it we notice a (" uestions change in its shape. As long as we press it i || ; : gently, it can come back to its original shape ho When do we sav that work is when the force is withdrawn. However, if we donc? press the balloon hard, it can even explode | 2. Write an expression tor the work producing a blasting sound. In all these | donc when a force is acting on examples. the objects acquire, through UJ an object in the direction of its different means, the capability of doing work. displacement. An object having a capability to do work is & Detine 13 of work. : said to possess energy. The object which does 4. A pair of bullocks exerts a forec the work loses energy and the object on which of 140N ona plough. The tield the work is done gains energy. being ploughed fs 15 m long. How does an object with energy do work? How amen work is done in An object that possesses energy can exert a ploughing the length of the field? force on another object. When this happens, energy is transferred from the former to the 10.2 Energy latter. The second object may move as it receives energy and therefore do some work. Life is impossible without energy. The demand — Thus, the first object had a capacity to do for energy is ever increasing. Where do we — work. This implies that any object that get energy from? The Sun is the biggest possesses energy can do work. natural source of energy to us. Many of our The energy possessed by an object is thus energy sources are derived from the Sun. We — measured in terms of its capacity of doing can also get energy from the nuclei of atoms, work. The unit of energy is, therefore, the same the interior of the earth, and the tides. Can as that of work, that is. joule (J). 1 J is the you think of other sources of energy? . . energy required to do 1 joule of work. Activity 10.5 Sometimes a larger unit of energy called kilo joule (kJ) is used. 1 kJ equals 1000 J. . A few sources of energy are listed above. There are many other sources 10.2.1 FoRMS OF ENERGY of energy. List them. ¢ Discuss in small groups how certain Luckily the world we live in provides energy in sourecs of energy are due to the Sun. many different forms. The various forms ° ar there ne Su ot energy which are include mechanical energy (potential energy not due to The Sun: + kinetic energy), heat energy. chemical The word energy is very often used in our energy. electrical energy and light energy. daily life, but in science we give it a definite : : : and precise meaning. Let us consider the following examples: when a fast moving Think it over ! cricket ball hits a stationary wicket. the wicket How do you know that some entity is a is thrown away. Similarly, an object when form of energy? Discuss with your friends raised to a certain height gets the capability and teachers. . to do work. You must have seen that when a 116 Science. : Reprint 2025-26

[Page 5]
WORK AND ENERGY 117 Fig. 10.5 • The trolley moves forward and hits the wooden block. • Fix a stop on the table in such a manner that the tr olley stops after hitting the block. The block gets displaced. • Note down the displacement of the block. This means work is done on the block by the tr olley as the block has gained energy. • From where does this energy come? • Repeat this activity by incr easing the mass on the pan. In which case is the displacement more? • In which case is the work done more? • In this activity, the moving trolley does work and hence it possesses energy. A moving object can do work. An object moving faster can do mor e work than an identical object moving r elatively slow. A moving bullet, blowing wind, a rotating wheel, a speeding stone can do work. How does a bullet pier ce the target? How does the wind move the blades of a windmill? Objects in motion possess energy. W e call this ener gy kinetic energy. A falling coconut, a speeding car, a rolling stone, a flying aircraft, flowing water, blowing wind, a running athlete etc. possess kinetic energy. In short, kinetic energy is the energy possessed by an object due to its motion. The kinetic energy of an object increases with its speed. How much ener gy is possessed by a moving body by virtue of its motion? By definition, we say that the kinetic energy of a body moving with a certain velocity is equal to the work done on it to make it acquire that velocity. 10.2.2KINETIC ENERGY Activity _____________ 10.6 • Take a heavy ball. Drop it on a thick bed of sand. A wet bed of sand would be better. Dr op the ball on the sand bed from height of about 25 cm. The ball creates a depression. • Repeat this activity fr om heights of 50 cm, 1m and 1.5 m. • Ensure that all the depr essions ar e distinctly visible. • Mark the depr essions to indicate the height fr om which the ball was dropped. • Compare their depths. • Which one of them is deepest? • Which one is shallowest? Why? • What has caused the ball to make a deeper dent? • Discuss and analyse. Activity _____________ 10.7 • Set up the apparatus as shown in Fig. 10.5. • Place a wooden block of known mass in front of the tr olley at a convenient fixed distance. • Place a known mass on the pan so that the trolley starts moving. James Pr escott Joule was an outstanding British physicist. He is best known for his research in electricity and ther modynamics. Amongst other things, he formulated a law for the heating effect of electric curr ent. He also verified experimentally the law of conservation of ener gy and discover ed the value of the mechanical equivalent of heat. The unit of ener gy and work called joule, is named after him. James Prescott Joule (1818 – 1889) Reprint 2025-26
James Prescott 4.7 _] — . outstanding i British physicist. : He ts best known Aa a for his research in ~ PE ute. electricity and o hes" wh thermodynamics. Ae ye 2 ‘ a - ony fh Amongst other b things, he Fig. 10.5 . Wa formulated a law James Prescott Joule for the heating ¢ The trolley moves forward and hits the (1818 - 1889} effect of electric wooden block. current. He also . Fix a stop on the table in such a vertfted experimentally the law of manner that the trolley stops after conservation of energy and discovered hitting the block. The block gets the value of the mechanical equivalent chsplaced. of heat. The unit of energy and work . Note down the displacement of the 4 hlock. This means work is done on the called joule, is named after him. block by the trolley as the block has gained energy. 10.2.2 KINETIC ENERGY ¢ From where does this energy come? . Repeat this activity by increasing the mass on the pan. In which case is the Activity 10.6 displacement more? one cee | . In which case is the work done more? ° pale a heavy pal Prop it on a thick . In this activity, the moving trolley does be hetter, Drop the ball on the sand work and hence it possesses energy. bed from height of about 25 em. The A moving object can do work. An object ball creates a depression. moving faster can do more work than an ¢ — Repeat this activity from heights of identical object moving relatively slow. A 50 em, lm and 1.5 m. . «Ensure that all the depressions are moving bullet, blowing wind, a rotating wheel, disunetly visible. a speeding stone can do work. How does a * Mark the depressions to incheate the bullet pierce the target’? How does the wind height from which the ball was move the blades of a windmill’? Objects in dropped. motion possess energy. We call this energy ¢ Compare their depths. kinetic energy. ° Which one of them is deepest? A falling coconut, a speeding car, a rolling ¢ = Which one is shallowest? Why? stone, a flying aircraft, flowing water, blowing . What has caused the hall to make a - - deeper dent? wind, a running athlete etc. possess kinetic e Discuss and analyse. energy. In short, kinetic energy is the energy . possessed by an object due to its motion. The Activity 10.7 kinetic energy of an object increases with its speed. . Set up the apparatus as shown in How much energy is possessed by a . Dince a wooden block of known mass moving body by virtue of its motion? By in front of the trolley at a convenient definition, we say that the kinetic energy of a fixed distance. . body moving with a certain velocity is equal to . Place a Known mass on the pan so the work done on it to make it acquire that the trolley starts moving. that velocity. Work avo Exexoy 117 Reprint 2025-26 :

[Page 6]
SCIENCE118 118118118118 Let us now express the kinetic energy of an object in the form of an equation. Consider an object of mass, m moving with a uniform velocity, u. Let it now be displaced through a distance s when a constant force, F acts on it in the dir ection of its displacement. Fr om Eq. (10.1), the work done, W is F s. The work done on the object will cause a change in its velocity. Let its velocity change fr om u to v. Let a be the acceleration produced. We studied three equations of motion. The relation connecting the initial velocity ( u) and final velocity ( v) of an object moving with a uniform acceleration a, and the displacement, s is v2 – u2 = 2a s This gives 2 2 v – us = 2a (10.2) From section 9.4, we know F = m a. Thus, using (Eq. 10.2) in Eq. (10.1), we can write the work done by the force, F as ×      2 2 v - uW = m a 2a or ( )1 2 2 2W = m v – u (10.3) If the object is starting from its stationary position, that is, u = 0, then 1 2 2W = m v (10.4) It is clear that the work done is equal to the change in the kinetic energy of an object. If u = 0, the work done will be 1 2 2m v . Thus, the kinetic ener gy possessed by an object of mass, m and moving with a uniform velocity, v is 1 2 2 kE = m v (10.5) Example 10.3Example 10.3Example 10.3Example 10.3Example 10.3 An object of mass 15 kg is moving with a uniform velocity of 4 m s –1. What is the kinetic energy possessed by the object? Solution: Solution:Solution:Solution:Solution: Mass of the object, m = 15 kg, velocity of the object, v = 4 m s–1. From Eq. (10.5), 1 2 2 kE = m v = 1 2 × 15 kg × 4 m s–1 × 4 m s–1 = 120 J The kinetic energy of the object is 120 J. Example 10.4 Example 10.4 Example 10.4 Example 10.4 Example 10.4 What is the work to be done to increase the velocity of a car fr om 30 km h –1 to 60 km h –1 if the mass of the car is 1500 kg? Solution: Solution:Solution:Solution:Solution: Mass of the car, m =1500 kg, initial velocity of car, u = 30 km h–1 = 30 × 1000 m 60 × 60 s = 25/3 m s–1. Similarly, the final velocity of the car, v = 60 km h–1 = 50/3 m s–1. Therefore, the initial kinetic ener gy of the car, Eki 1 2 2 = m u = 1 2 × 1500 kg × (25/3 m s–1)2 = 156250/3 J. The final kinetic energy of the car, Ekf = 1 2 × 1500 kg × (50/3 m s–1)2 = 625000/3 J. Thus, the work done = Change in kinetic energy = Ekf – Eki = 156250 J. Reprint 2025-26
Let us now express the kinetic energy of Solution: an object in the form of an equation. Consider Mass of the objec = 15 kg. velocity an object of mass, m moving with a uniform tthe ot ne 9 niet 4 m = Hs 8, velocity velocity, a. Let it now be displaced through a oO : ne ° hjec 5 vyeams”. distance s when a constant force, Facts on it From Eq. (10.5). in the direction of its displacement. From KE = 1 2 Eq. (10.1), the work done. Wis Fs. The work a) mp done on the object will cause a change in its velocity. Let its velocity change from u to v. = 1 x1Skgx4ims'x4ms! Let a be the acceleration produced. 2 We studied three equations of motion. The = 120J relation connecting the initial velocity (14) The kinetic energy of the object is 120 J. and final velocity (1) of an object moving ——_— —_—_— with a uniform acceleration a, and the ——..—————— displacement, sis Example 10.4 What is the work to be done Vo owe=2as to increase the velocity of a car from 4 71 } -1 qoa This gives 30 km h"' to GO km h*! if the mass of j , the car is 1500 kg? wou 3 =— 10.2 2a ( } Solution: From section 9.4. we know F = m a. Thus, Mass of the car, m =1500 kg, using (Eq. 10.2) in Eq. (10.1). we can write the . . “ “1 ~ initial velocity of car, a = 30 kmh work done by the force, Fas ya 30. 1000m Or ut) = Bay en We=max 60 x 60s \ 2a ] =25/3ms"'. or . 1 Similarly. the final velocity of the car, We 7” (v? u*) (10.3) v= 60 kmh! = 8ms! If the object is starting from its stationary Th a popes a lk ; sone position, that is, a= 0, then Therefore, the initial kinetic energy of the car, I 2 We mv? (10.4) - 1 2 2 By Srmue It is clear that the work done is equal to the 2 change in the kinetic energy of an object. 1 1 = 9 1500 kg x (25/3 ms!) If a = 0, the work done will be 3” vw. = 156250/3u. Thus, the kinetic energy possessed by an The final kinetic energy of the car. object of mass, mand moving with a uniform velocity. vis 1 1 ; Ey = 2* 1500 kg « (50/3 ms '/? Boogie (10.5) = 625000/3 J. Thus, the work done = Change in Example 10.3 An object of mass 15 kg is kinetic energy moving with a uniform velocity of 4 = BL, -#, m s‘'. What is the kinetic energy * en possessed by the object? = 156250 J. 118 Sewn, Reprint 2025-26

[Page 7]
WORK AND ENERGY 119 uestions 1. What is the kinetic energy of an object? 2. Write an expression for the kinetic energy of an object. 3. The kinetic energy of an object of mass, m moving with a velocity of 5 m s–1 is 25 J. What will be its kinetic energy when its velocity is doubled? What will be its kinetic energy when its velocity is increased three times? 10.2.3POTENTIAL ENERGY Activity _____________ 10.8 • Take a rubber band. • Hold it at one end and pull fr om the other. The band stretches. • Release the band at one of the ends. • What happens? • The band will tend to regain its original length. Obviously the band had acquir ed ener gy in its str etched position. • How did it acquir e ener gy when stretched? Activity _____________ 10.9 • Take a slinky as shown below. • Ask a friend to hold one of its ends. You hold the other end and move away from your friend. Now you release the slinky. Activity ___________ 10.11 • Lift an object through a certain height. The object can now do work. It begins to fall when released. • This implies that it has acquired some energy. If raised to a gr eater height it can do more work and hence possesses more energy. • From where did it get the energy? Think and discuss. In the above situations, the ener gy gets stored due to the work done on the object. The energy transferred to an object is stored as potential energy if it is not used to cause a change in the velocity or speed of the object. You transfer energy when you stretch a rubber band. The energy transferr ed to the band is its potential energy. You do work while winding the key of a toy car . The ener gy transferred to the spring inside is stor ed as potential ener gy. The potential ener gy possessed by the object is the energy present in it by virtue of its position or configuration. Activity ___________ 10.12 • Take a bamboo stick and make a bow as shown in Fig. 10.6. • Place an arrow made of a light stick on it with one end supported by the stretched string. • Now stretch the string and release the arrow. • Notice the arrow flying off the bow. Notice the change in the shape of the bow. • The potential energy stored in the bow due to the change of shape is thus used in the for m of kinetic ener gy in throwing off the arrow. Q Fig.10.6: An arrow and the stretched string on the bow. • What happened? • How did the slinky acquire energy when stretched? • Would the slinky acquire energy when it is compressed? Activity ___________ 10.10 • Take a toy car . Wind it using its key. • Place the car on the ground. • Did it move? • From where did it acquire energy? • Does the energy acquired depend on the number of windings? • How can you test this? Reprint 2025-26
(" Westious Activity s«é'C0«W | 1. Whatis the kinedc cnerev of an . Lift an object through a certain abjccr? height. The object can now do work. 200 Write an expression tor the kinetic It begins to fall when released. | cnerev of an object. e This implies that it has acquired some | 3. The kinetic cncrav ofan object ot energy. If raised to a greater height it ww mass. mM inovine with a velocity can do more work and hence possesses of 5 rs? is 25. What will be its more energy. . kinetic encrey when its velocity . From where did it get the energy? Think K Fa « ; ; ; +. and discuss. is doubled? What will be its * Kinetic cnerayv when its velocity In the above situations, the energy gets is inercascd Uiree (ines? stored due to the work done on the object. The energy transferred to an object is stored 10.2.3 POTENTIAL ENERGY as potential energy if it is not used to cause a .. change in the velocity or speed of the object. Activity 10.8 You transfer energy when you stretch a o rubber band. The energy transferred to the . Take a rubber band. band is its iale ~~ You do work whil . Hold it at one end and pull from the band Is its potentia energy. OU clo Wor wane other, The band stretches. winding the key of a toy car. The energy . Release the band at one of the ends. transferred to the spring inside is stored as ¢ What happens? potential energy. The potential energy . The band will tend to regain its orginal possessed by the object is the energy present length. Obviously the band had in it by virtue of its position or configuration. acquired energy in its stretched ° position, Activity 10.12 . How did it acquire energy when —_—_——c—m stretched? ¢ ‘Take a bamboo suck and make a bow oe as shown in Fig. 10.6. Activity — 10.9 . Place an arrow made of a light stick on * Take a slinky as shown below it with one end supported by the . Ask a friend to hold one of its ends. stretched string. . You hold the other end and move away * Now stretch the string and release the from your friend. Now you release the arrow. . slinky. . Notice the arrow fying off the how. ° Notice the change in the shape of the / \ pow , A ~ . The potential energy stored in the bow F > due to the change of shape is thus used ¢ What happened? . in the form of kinetic energy in . How did the slinky acquire energy when throwing off the arrow. stretched? . Would the slinky acquire energy when it is compressed? Activity 10.10 ° ‘Take a toy car. Wind it using its key. . Place the car on the ground. WA . Did it move? oa . From where did it acquire enerey? tess . Does the energy acquired depend on the number of windings? Fig.10.6. An arrow and the stretched string . How can you test this? on the bow. Worn avo Exnrar 119 Reprint 2025-26

[Page 8]
SCIENCE120 10.2.4POTENTIAL ENERGY OF AN OBJECT AT A HEIGHT An object increases its energy when raised through a height. This is because work is done on it against gravity while it is being raised. The energy present in such an object is the gravitational potential energy. The gravitational potential ener gy of an object at a point above the ground is defined as the work done in raising it from the ground to that point against gravity. It is easy to arrive at an expr ession for the gravitational potential energy of an object at a height. Fig. 10.7 Consider an object of mass, m. Let it be raised through a height, h fr om the ground. A force is required to do this. The minimum force required to raise the object is equal to the weight of the object, mg. The object gains energy equal to the work done on it. Let the work done on the object against gravity be W. That is, work done, W = force × displacement = mg × h = mgh Since work done on the object is equal to mgh, an energy equal to mgh units is gained by the object. This is the potential energy (EP) of the object. Ep = mgh (10.6) More to know The potential energy of an object at a height depends on the ground level or the zero level you choose. An object in a given position can have a certain potential energy with respect to one level and a different value of potential energy with respect to another level. It is useful to note that the work done by gravity depends on the difference in vertical heights of the initial and final positions of the object and not on the path along which the object is moved. Fig. 10.8 shows a case where a block is raised from position A to B by taking two different paths. Let the height AB = h. In both the situations the work done on the object is mgh. Fig. 10.8 Example 10.5 Find the energy possessed by an object of mass 10 kg when it is at a height of 6 m above the ground. Given, g = 9.8 m s–2. Solution: Mass of the object, m = 10 kg, displacement (height), h = 6 m, and acceleration due to gravity, g = 9.8 m s–2. From Eq. (10.6), Potential ener gy = mgh = 10 kg × 9.8 m s–2 × 6 m = 588 J. The potential energy is 588 J. Reprint 2025-26
10.2.4 PoTENTIAL ENERGY OF AN OBJECT ME The potential energy of an object at AT A HEIGHT Eg a height depends on the ground level An object increases its energy when raised = ob the vero level you choose. | An through a height. This is because work is ° z ab Pos . men ° ° Pee certain potential energy with respect done on it against gravity while it is being io one level and a different value of raised, The energy present in such an object 5 potential energy with respect to is the gravitational potential energy. => another level. : The gravitational potential energy of an , object at a point above the ground is defined : as the work done in raising it from the ground It is useful to note that t he work done by to that point against gravity 7 gravity depends on the difference in vertical It is easy to arrive at an expression for heights of the initial and final positions of - the object and not on the path along which the gravitational potential energy of an object ~ : at a height the object is moved. Fig. 10.8 shows a case . a where a block is raised from position A to B by taking two different paths. Let the height AB = A. In both the situations the work done on the object is mgh. — \ \ fh i i H " Path 1 ' h Path 2 \ rs | ' a Ground IN A Fig. 10.7 Fig. 10.8 Consider an object of mass, mm. Let it be raised through a height, f from the ground. Example 10.5 Find the energy possessed A force is required to do this. The minimum by an object of mass 10 kg when it is at force required to raise the object is equal to a height of 6 m above the ground. Given, the weight of the object, mg. The object gains g=9.8ms% energy equal to the work done on it. Let the ° work done on the object against gravity be Solution: W. That is. . work done, W = force x displacement Mass of the object. m = 10 kg, = mex hh displacement (height). 4 = 6 m,. and = melt acceleration due to gravity, g= 9.8 ms’. Since work done on the object is equal to From Eq. (10.6), ; mgh, an energy equal to mgh units is gained Potential One = mgh by the object. This is the potential energy (£,) ~ a | x9.Bins*x 6m of the object. = oe . . The potential energy is 588 J. B= ingh {10.6) 120 Science. Reprint 2025-26

[Page 9]
WORK AND ENERGY 121 Example 10.6 An object of mass 12 kg is at a certain height above the gr ound. If the potential energy of the object is 480 J, find the height at which the object is with r espect to the gr ound. Given, g = 10 m s–2. Solution: Mass of the object, m = 12 kg, potential energy, Ep = 480 J. Ep = mgh 480 J = 12 kg × 10 m s–2 × h h = –2 480 J 120 kg m s = 4 m. The object is at the height of 4 m. 10.2.5ARE VARIOUS ENERGY FORMS INTERCONVERTIBLE? Can we convert ener gy fr om one for m to another? W e find in natur e a number of instances of conversion of ener gy from one form to another. Activity ___________ 10.13 • Sit in small groups. • Discuss the various ways of ener gy conversion in nature. • Discuss following questions in your group: (a) How do green plants produce food? (b) Where do they get their energy from? (c) Why does the air move fr om place to place? (d) How ar e fuels, such as coal and petroleum formed? (e) What kinds of energy conversions sustain the water cycle? Activity ___________ 10.14 • Many of the human activities and the gadgets we use involve conversion of energy from one form to another. • Make a list of such activities and gadgets. • Identify in each activity/gadget the kind of energy conversion that takes place. 10.2.6LAW OF CONSERVATION OF ENERGY In activities 10.13 and 10.14, we learnt that the form of energy can be changed from one form to another. What happens to the total energy of a system during or after the process? Whenever energy gets transformed, the total energy remains unchanged. This is the law of conservation of energy. According to this law, energy can only be converted from one form to another; it can neither be created or destroyed. The total energy before and after the transformation remains the same. The law of conservation of energy is valid in all situations and for all kinds of transformations. Consider a simple example. Let an object of mass, m be made to fall freely from a height, h. At the start, the potential energy is mgh and kinetic energy is zero. Why is the kinetic energy zero? It is zero because its velocity is zero. The total energy of the object is thus mgh. As it falls, its potential energy will change into kinetic energy. If v is the velocity of the object at a given instant, the kinetic energy would be ½mv2. As the fall of the object continues, the potential energy would decrease while the kinetic energy would increase. When the object is about to reach the ground, h = 0 and v will be the highest. Therefore, the kinetic energy would be the largest and potential energy the least. However, the sum of the potential energy and kinetic energy of the object would be the same at all points. That is, potential energy + kinetic energy = constant or 1 constant. 2 2mgh + mv = (10.7) The sum of kinetic energy and potential energy of an object is its total mechanical energy. We find that during the free fall of the object, the decrease in potential energy, at any point in its path, appears as an equal amount of increase in kinetic energy. (Here the effect of air resistance on the motion of the object has been ignored.) There is thus a continual transformation of gravitational potential energy into kinetic energy. Reprint 2025-26
Example 10.6 An object of mass 12 kg is 10.2.6 LAW OF CONSERVATION OF ENERGY at a certain height above the ground. In activities 10.13 and 10.14, we learnt that Ifthe potential energy of the object is the form of energy can be changed from one 480 J, find the height at which the form to another. What happens to the total object is with respect to the ground. + nf ey eeureat po aft eo croreaecest ne i. energy of a system during or after the process? Given, g= 10. ms”. Whenever energy gets transformed, the total Solution: energy remains unchanged. This is the law of conservation of energy. According to this law, Mass of the object, m= 12 kg. energy can only be converted from one form potential energy, FE, = 480 J. to another; it can neither be created or EB = mgh destroyed. The total energy before and after A80 J = 12kgx 1Oms?xh the transformation remains the same. The law 480 J of conservation of energy is valid in ho= 120 kgms® = Am. all situations and for all Kinds of transformations. The object is at the height of 4m. Consider a simple example. Let an object TTT: Of mass, a7 be made to fall freely froma height, 10.2.5 ARE VARIOUS ENERGY FORMS #2. At the start. the potential energy is mgh and ve prt ED Kinetic energy is zero. Why is the kinetic INTERCONVERTIBLES energy zero? It is zero because its velocity is Can we convert energy from one form to — ero. The total energy of the object is thus mgh. another? We find in nature a number of — Asit falls, its potential energy will change into instances of conversion of energy from one kinetic energy. If vis the velocity of the object form to another. at a given instant, the kinetic energy would be . Yan”, As the fall of the object continues, the Activity 10.13 potential energy would decrease while the - cane kinetic energy would increase. When the object . Sit in small groups. ° Discuss the various ways of energy is about to reach the ground, A = 0 and vwill conversion in nature. be the highest. Therefore. the kinetic energy ¢ Discuss following questions in your would be the largest and potential energy the group: least. However, the sum of the potential energy (a) How do green plants produce food? and kinetic energy of the object would be the (b) Where do they get their energy trom? same at all points. That is. (c) Why does the air move from place 7 wear . ate to place? potential energy + kinetic energy = constant (d) How are fuels, such as coal and or petroleum formed? if > (e) What kinds of energy conversions mah + 2 mo"= constant (10.7) sustain the water cycle? . The sum of kinetic energy and potential energy Activity 10.14 ofan object is its total mechanical energy. TT We find that during the free fall of the object, ¢ = Many of the human activities and the the decrease in potential energy, at any point gadgets we use involve conversion of in its path, appears as an equal amount of energy from one form to another. increase in kinetic energy. (Here the effect of . Make a list of such activities and wae . . . gadgets. air resistance on the motion of the object has . Identify in each acuvity/gadget the been ignored.) There is thus a continual kind of energy conversion that takes transformation of gravitational potential place. energy into kinetic energy. Worn avo Exnrar 121 Reprint 2025-26 :

[Page 10]
SCIENCE122 A stronger person may do certain work in relatively less time. A more powerful vehicle would complete a journey in a shorter time than a less powerful one. We talk of the power of machines like motorbikes and motorcars. The speed with which these vehicles change ener gy or do work is a basis for their classification. Power measures the speed of work done, that is, how fast or slow work is done. Power is defined as the rate of doing work or the rate of transfer of ener gy. If an agent does a work W in time t, then power is given by: Power = work/time or WP = t (10.8) The unit of power is watt [in honour of James Watt (1736 – 1819)] having the symbol W. 1 watt is the power of an agent, which does work at the rate of 1 joule per second. We can also say that power is 1 W when the rate of consumption of energy is 1 J s–1. 1 watt = 1 joule/second or 1 W = 1 J s–1. We express larger rates of energy transfer in kilowatts (kW). 1 kilowatt = 1000 watts 1 kW = 1000 W 1 kW = 1000 J s–1. The power of an agent may vary with time. This means that the agent may be doing work at different rates at different intervals of time. Therefore the concept of average power is useful. We obtain average power by dividing the total energy consumed by the total time taken. Example 10.7 Two girls, each of weight 400 N climb up a rope through a height of 8 m. We name one of the girls A and the other B. Girl A takes 20 s while B takes 50 s to accomplish this task. What is the power expended by each girl? Solution: (i) Power expended by girl A: Weight of the girl, mg = 400 N Displacement (height), h = 8 m Activity ___________ 10.15 • An object of mass 20 kg is dropped from a height of 4 m. Fill in the blanks in the following table by computing the potential energy and kinetic energy in each case. Height at Potential Kinetic Ep + Ek which object energy energy is located (Ep= mgh) (Ek = mv2/2) m J J J 4 3 2 1 Just above the ground • For simplifying the calculations, take the value of g as 10 m s–2. Think it over ! What would have happened if nature had not allowed the transformation of energy? There is a view that life could not have been possible without transformation of energy. Do you agree with this? 10.3Rate of Doing Work Do all of us work at the same rate? Do machines consume or transfer energy at the same rate? Agents that transfer ener gy do work at different rates. Let us understand this from the following activity: Activity ___________ 10.16 • Consider two children, say A and B. Let us say they weigh the same. Both start climbing up a r ope separately. Both reach a height of 8 m. Let us say A takes 15 s while B takes 20 s to accomplish the task. • What is the work done by each? • The work done is the same. However , A has taken less time than B to do the work. • Who has done more work in a given time, say in 1 s? Reprint 2025-26
Activity 10.15 Astronger person may do certain work in TTT relatively less time. A more powerful vehicle * An object of mass 20 kg is dropped would complete a journey in a shorter time from a height of 4 m. Fillin the blanks than a less powerful one. We talk of the power in the following table by computing of machines like motorbikes and motorcars. the potential enerey and Kinetic The speed with which these vehicles change energy in cach case. : 5 energy or do work is a basis for their classification. Power measures the speed of which object | energy energy , work done, that is, how fast or slow work is is located = |(t5,= mgh) |(E, = mv?/2) done. Power is defined as the rate of doing work or the rate of transfer of energy. If an m J J J agent does a work W in time ¢, then power is 4 given by: 3 Power = work/time 2 w 1 or Pe t (10.8) Just above op . the ground The unit of power is watt [in honour of James Watt (1736 - 1819)] having the symbol ¢ For simplifying the calculations, take W. 1 watt is the power of an agent, which the value of gas 10 ms’. does work at the rate of 1 joule per second. We can also say that power is 1 W when the Think it over ! rate of consumption of energy is 1 J sl. What would have happened if nature had 1 watt = 1 joule/second or 1 W = 1d 8". not allowed the transformation of energy? We express larger rates of energy transfer in There is a view that life could not have kilowatts (kW). been possible without transformation of 1 kilowatt = 1000 watts energy. Do you agree with this’? 1kW = 1000 W 1kWw = 1000J 871. . The power of an agent may vary with time. 10.3 Rate of Doing Work This means that the agent may be doing work Do all of us work at the same rate? Do at different rates at different intervals of time. machines consume or transfer energy at the Therefore the concept of average power is same rate? Agents that transfer energy do Useful. We obtain average power by dividing work at different rates. Let us understand this — the total energy consumed by the total time from the following activity: taken. Activity TTT 10.16 Example 10.7 Two girls, each of weight 400 * Consider two children, say A and B. N climb up a rope through a height of 8 Let us say they weigh the same. Both m. We name one of the girls A and the start chmbing Up a rope separately. other B. Girl A takes 20 s while B takes Both reach a height of 8 m. Let us say A takes 13 8 while B takes 20 s to 50s to accomplish this task. What is the accomplish the task. power expended by each girl’? . What is the work done by cach? Solution: . The work done 1s the same. However, A has taken less time than B to do (i) Power expended by girl A: the work. ; ; Weight of the girl, mg= 400 N . Who has done more work in a given ° " time. say in 1 8? 7 Displacement (height), A= 8m 122 Science. : Reprint 2025-26

[Page 11]
WORK AND ENERGY 123 power, P = Work done/time taken = mgh t = 500 N × 6.75 m 9 s = 375 W. Power is 375 W. uestions 1. What is power? 2. Define 1 watt of power. 3. A lamp consumes 1000 J of electrical energy in 10 s. What is its power? 4. Define average power. Activity ___________ 10.17 • Take a close look at the electric meter installed in your house. Observe its features closely. • Take the readings of the meter each day at 6.30 am and 6.30 pm. • Do this activity for about a week. • How many ‘units’ are consumed during day time? • How many ‘units’ are used during night? • Tabulate your observations. • Draw inferences from the data. • Compare your observations with the details given in the monthly electricity bill (One can also estimate the electricity to be consumed by specific appliances by tabulating their known wattages and hours of operation). Time taken, t = 20 s From Eq. (10.8), Power, P = Work done/time taken = mgh t = 400 N × 8 m 20 s = 160 W. (ii) Power expended by girl B: Weight of the girl, mg = 400 N Displacement (height), h = 8 m Time taken, t = 50 s Power, P = mgh t = 400 N × 8 m 50 s = 64 W. Power expended by girl A is 160 W. Power expended by girl B is 64 W. Example 10.8 A boy of mass 50 kg runs up a staircase of 45 steps in 9 s. If the height of each step is 15 cm, find his power. Take g = 10 m s–2. Solution: Weight of the boy, mg = 50 kg × 10 m s–2 = 500 N Height of the stair case, h = 45 × 15/100 m = 6.75 m Time taken to climb, t = 9 s From Eq. (10.8), Q Reprint 2025-26
Time taken, f= 20s power, P= Work done/time taken From Eq. (10.8), 4 } mgh Power, P = Work done/time taken = t _ igh 500 NX6.75m t = Qs AOO NX 8 11 = 375 W. * 20s Power is 375 W. = 160W. ee > py > os 7 whe . (ii), Power expe nded by girl B: (1 est IONS Weight of the girl, mg = 400 N | Displacement (height), A = 8m 1. What is power? Time taken, (= 508 2. Detine 1 watt of power. magh | 3 A lamp consumes 1000 J of Power, P = magn G electrical cnerey in 10s. What is ' its power? 400 NX 8m 4. Detine average power. * 50s = 6AW. Activity 10.17 Power expended by girl A is 160 W. ¢ = Take a close look at the electric meter Power expended by girl B is 64 W. instalied in your house. Observe its —=_n_es———— features closely. . Take the readings of the meter each ——]|\ day at 6.30 am and 6.30 pm. Example 10.8 A boy of mass 50 kg runs ¢ = 1d0 this activity for about a week. up a staircase of 45 steps in 9 s. If the ¢ How many ‘units’ are consumed height of each step is 15 cm, find his during day time? power. Take g= 10 ms”. . How many ‘units’ are used during night? , e Tabulate your observations. Solution: . Draw inferences from the data. . Compare your observations with Weight of the boy, the details given in the monthly mg= 50 kg x 10ms7 = 500N electricity bill (One can also estimate Height of the staircase, the electricity to be consumed by h=45 x 15/100 m = 6.75 m specific appliances by tabulating their Time taken to climb, 1=9s known wattages and hours of From Eq. (10.8). operation). Work avo Exexoy 123 Reprint 2025-26

[Page 12]
SCIENCE124 What you have learnt • Work done on an object is defined as the magnitude of the force multiplied by the distance moved by the object in the direction of the applied force. The unit of work is joule: 1 joule = 1 newton × 1 metre. • Work done on an object by a for ce would be zer o if the displacement of the object is zero. • An object having capability to do work is said to possess energy. Energy has the same unit as that of work. • An object in motion possesses what is known as the kinetic energy of the object. An object of mass, m moving with velocity v has a kinetic energy of 2mv1 2 . • The energy possessed by a body due to its change in position or shape is called the potential energy. The gravitational potential energy of an object of mass, m raised through a height, h from the earth’s surface is given by m g h . • According to the law of conservation of energy, energy can only be transformed from one form to another; it can neither be created nor destroyed. The total energy before and after the transformation always remains constant. • Energy exists in nature in several forms such as kinetic energy, potential energy, heat energy, chemical energy etc. The sum of the kinetic and potential energies of an object is called its mechanical energy. • Power is defined as the rate of doing work. The SI unit of power is watt. 1 W = 1 J/s. Exercises 1. Look at the activities listed below. Reason out whether or not work is done in the light of your understanding of the term ‘work’. • Suma is swimming in a pond. • A donkey is carrying a load on its back. • A wind-mill is lifting water from a well. • A green plant is carrying out photosynthesis. • An engine is pulling a train. Reprint 2025-26
id) What Aig you have 1 NN. re ae a: > a? learnt Ce ° Work done on an object is defined as the magnitude of the force multiplied by the distance moved by the object in the direction of the applied foree. The unit of work is joule: 1 joule = | newton x | metre. ° Work done on an object by a force would be zero if the displacement of the object is zero. ° An object having capability to do work is said to possess energy. Energy has the same unit as that of work. ° An object in motion possesses what is known as the kinetic energy of the object. An object of mass, m moving with i i i 7 1 iw? velocity v has a kinetic energy of » . ° The energy possessed by a body due to its change in position or shape is called the potential energy. The gravitational potential energy of an object of mass, m raised through a height, # from the earth's surface is given by m gh. ° According to the law of conservation of energy, energy can only be transformed from one form to another; it can neither be created nor destroyed. The total energy before and after the transformation always remains constant. ° Energy exists in nature in several forms such as kinetic energy, potential energy, heat energy, chemical energy ete. The sum of the kinetic and potential energies of an object is called its mechanical energy. ° Power is defined as the rate of doing work. The SI unit of power is watt. 1 W = 1 J/s. . | __ «Exercises RS 1. Look at the activities listed below. Reason out whether or i ! 2 not work is done in the light of your understanding of the ah term ‘work’. ° Suma is swimming in a pond. SS . A donkey is carrying a load on its back. . A wind-mill is lifting water from a well. . A green plant is carrying out photosynthesis. . An engine is pulling a train. 124 Sewxer, Reprint 2025-26

[Page 13]
WORK AND ENERGY 125 • Food grains are getting dried in the sun. • A sailboat is moving due to wind energy. 2. An object thrown at a certain angle to the ground moves in a curved path and falls back to the ground. The initial and the final points of the path of the object lie on the same horizontal line. What is the work done by the force of gravity on the object? 3. A battery lights a bulb. Describe the energy changes involved in the process. 4. Certain force acting on a 20 kg mass changes its velocity from 5 m s –1 to 2 m s –1. Calculate the work done by the force. 5. A mass of 10 kg is at a point A on a table. It is moved to a point B. If the line joining A and B is horizontal, what is the work done on the object by the gravitational force? Explain your answer . 6. The potential energy of a freely falling object decreases progressively. Does this violate the law of conservation of energy? Why? 7. What are the various energy transformations that occur when you are riding a bicycle? 8. Does the transfer of energy take place when you push a huge rock with all your might and fail to move it? Where is the energy you spend going? 9. A certain household has consumed 250 units of energy during a month. How much energy is this in joules? 10. An object of mass 40 kg is raised to a height of 5 m above the ground. What is its potential energy? If the object is allowed to fall, find its kinetic energy when it is half-way down. 11. What is the work done by the force of gravity on a satellite moving round the earth? Justify your answer . 12. Can there be displacement of an object in the absence of any force acting on it? Think. Discuss this question with your friends and teacher . 13. A person holds a bundle of hay over his head for 30 minutes and gets tired. Has he done some work or not? Justify your answer. 14. An electric heater is rated 1500 W . How much ener gy does it use in 10 hours? 15. Illustrate the law of conservation of energy by discussing the energy changes which occur when we draw a pendulum bob to one side and allow it to oscillate. Why does the bob Reprint 2025-26
. Food grains are getting dried in the sun. . A sailboat is moving due to wind energy. 2. An object thrown at a certain angle to the ground moves in a curved path and falls back to the ground. The initial and the final points of the path of the object lie on the same horizontal line. What is the work done by the force of gravity on the object? 3. A battery lights a bulb. Describe the energy changes involved in the process. 4. Certain force acting on a 20 kg mass changes its velocity from 5 ms! to 2ms!. Calculate the work done by the force. 5. A mass of 10 kg is at a point A ona table. It is moved to a point B. If the line joining A and B is horizontal, what is the work done on the object by the gravitational force? Explain your answer. 6. The potential energy of a freely falling object decreases progressively. Does this violate the law of conservation of energy? Why? 7. What are the various energy transformations that occur when you are riding a bicycle’? 8. Does the transfer of energy take place when you push a huge rock with all your might and fail to move it? Where is the energy you spend going? 9. A certain household has consumed 250 units of energy during a month. How much energy is this in joules’? 10. An object of mass 40 kg is raised to a height of 5 m above the ground. What is its potential energy? If the object is allowed to fall, find its kinetic energy when it is half-way down. 11. What is the work done by the force of gravity on a satellite moving round the earth? Justify your answer. 12. Can there be displacement of an object in the absence of any foree acting on it? Think. Discuss this question with your friends and teacher. 13. A person holds a bundle of hay over his head for 30 minutes and gets tired. Has he done some work or not? Justify your answer. 14. An electric heater is rated 1500 W. How much energy does it use in 10 hours? 15. Illustrate the law of conservation of energy by discussing the energy changes which occur when we draw a pendulum bob to one side and allow it to oscillate. Why does the bob Work asp Exexcy 125 Reprint 2025-26

[Page 14]
SCIENCE126 eventually come to rest? What happens to its energy eventually? Is it a violation of the law of conservation of energy? 16. An object of mass, m is moving with a constant velocity, v. How much work should be done on the object in order to bring the object to rest? 17. Calculate the work required to be done to stop a car of 1500 kg moving at a velocity of 60 km/h? 18. In each of the following a force, F is acting on an object of mass, m. The direction of displacement is from west to east shown by the longer arrow. Observe the diagrams carefully and state whether the work done by the force is negative, positive or zero. 19. Soni says that the acceleration in an object could be zero even when several forces are acting on it. Do you agree with her? Why? 20. Find the energy in joules consumed in 10 hours by four devices of power 500 W each. 21. A freely falling object eventually stops on reaching the ground. What happenes to its kinetic energy? Reprint 2025-26
eventually come to rest? What happens to its energy eventually? Is it a violation of the law of conservation of energy? 16. An object of mass, 77 is moving with a constant velocity, v. How much work should be done on the object in order to bring the object to rest? 17. Caleulate the work required to be done to stop a car of 1500 kg moving at a velocity of 60 km/h? 18. In each of the following a foree, F is acting on an object of mass, m. The direction of displacement is from west to cast shown by the longer arrow. Observe the diagrams carefully and state whether the work done by the force is negative, positive or zero. rp t F F 19. Soni says that the acceleration in an object could be zero even when several forees are acting on it. Do you agree with her? Why? 20. Find the energy in joules consumed in 10 hours by four devices of power 500 W each. 21. A freely falling object eventually stops on reaching the ground. What happenes to its kinetic energy? 126 Sewxer, Reprint 2025-26