[Page 1]
In everyday life, we see some objects at r est and others in motion. Bir ds fly, fish swim, blood flows through veins and arteries, and cars move. Atoms, molecules, planets, stars and galaxies ar e all in motion. W e often perceive an object to be in motion when its position changes with time. However , there are situations wher e the motion is inferr ed through indirect evidences. For example, we infer the motion of air by observing the movement of dust and the movement of leaves and branches of tr ees. What causes the phenomena of sunrise, sunset and changing of seasons? Is it due to the motion of the earth? If it is true, why don’t we dir ectly perceive the motion of the earth? An object may appear to be moving for one person and stationary for some other. For the passengers in a moving bus, the roadside trees appear to be moving backwar ds. A person standing on the r oad–side perceives the bus alongwith the passengers as moving. However, a passenger inside the bus sees his fellow passengers to be at rest. What do these observations indicate? Most motions are complex. Some objects may move in a straight line, others may take a circular path. Some may r otate and a few others may vibrate. There may be situations involving a combination of these. In this chapter, we shall first lear n to describe the motion of objects along a straight line. W e shall also lear n to expr ess such motions through simple equations and graphs. Later, we shall discuss ways of describing circular motion. Activity ______________ 7.1 • Discuss whether the walls of your classr oom are at rest or in motion. Activity ______________ 7.2 • Have you ever experienced that the train in which you are sitting appears to move while it is at rest? • Discuss and share your experience. Think and Act We sometimes are endangered by the motion of objects around us, especially if that motion is erratic and uncontrolled as observed in a flooded river, a hurricane or a tsunami. On the other hand, controlled motion can be a service to human beings such as in the generation of hydro-electric power. Do you feel the necessity to study the erratic motion of some objects and learn to control them? 7.1 Describing Motion We describe the location of an object by specifying a r efer ence point. Let us understand this by an example. Let us assume that a school in a village is 2 km north of the railway station. We have specified the position of the school with r espect to the railway station. In this example, the railway station is the reference point. We could have also chosen other reference points according to our convenience. Therefore, to describe the position of an object we need to specify a reference point called the origin. 7 MMM MMOTION OTIONOTION OTIONOTION C hapter Reprint 2025-26
ree Ope 0] 5 ' 2 Cy Lp ye od i. ay! pay syte a Chapter ( Glee viet 98 In everyday life. we see some objects at rest Activity 7.1 and others in motion. Birds fly. fish swim. ; blood flows through veins and arteries, and ° Discuss whether the walls of your classroom are at rest or in motion. cars move. Atoms. molecules, planets, stars and galaxies are all in motion. We often Activity 7.2 perceive an object to be in motion when its | siti shanges with ti i ‘er, there . Have you ever experienced that the position changes w me. tlowever, me re train in which you are sitting appears are situations where the motion is inferred to move while it is at rest? through indirect evidences. For example, we ¢ — Discuss and share your experience. infer the motion of air by observing the movement of dust and the movement of leaves Think and Act. and branches of trees. What causes the . - 7 - We sometimes are cndangecrced by the phenomena of sunrise, sunset and changing . a . . ‘ as motion of objects around tis, especially of seasons? Is it due to the motion of the . . on _ we . h? If hy don’ ‘ \ ff that motion ¢s erratic and earth? If it is true, w hy don't we directly uncontrolled as observed ina flooded perceive the motion of the earth’? river. a hurricane ora tsunami, On the An object may appear to be moving for other hand, controlled motion catt be a one person and stationary for some other. For service to human beings such as in the the passengers in a moving bus. the roadside generation of hydro-electric power. Do trees appear to be moving backwards. A vou feel the necessity to study the person standing on the road-side perceives erratic motion of some objects arid the bus alongwith the passengers as moving. fearn to control then: However, a passenger inside the bus sees his ye . fellow passengers to be at rest. What do these 71 Describing Motion observations indicate? We describe the location of an object by Most motions are complex. Some objects specifying a reference point. Let us may move ina straight line, others may take understand this by an example. Let us a circular path. Some may rotate and a few assume that a school ina village is 2 km north others may vibrate. There may be situations of the railway station. We have specified the involving a combination of these. In this — position of the school with respect to the chapter, we shall first learn to describe the — railway station. In this example, the railway motion of objects along a straight line. We — station is the reference point. We could have shall also learn to express such motions — also chosen other reference points according through simple equations and graphs. Later, to our convenience. Therefore. to describe the we shall discuss ways of describing Position of an object we need to specify a circular motion. reference point called the origin. Reprint 2025-26

[Page 2]
7.1.1 MOTION ALONG A STRAIGHT LINE The simplest type of motion is the motion along a straight line. W e shall first lear n to describe this by an example. Consider the motion of an object moving along a straight path. The object starts its jour ney fr om O which is tr eated as its r efer ence point (Fig. 7.1). Let A, B and C represent the position of the object at different instants. At first, the object moves through C and B and reaches A. Then it moves back along the same path and reaches C through B. are used to describe the overall motion of an object and to locate its final position with reference to its initial position at a given time. Activity ______________ 7.3 • Take a metre scale and a long rope. • Walk from one corner of a basket-ball court to its oppposite cor ner along its sides. • Measure the distance cover ed by you and magnitude of the displacement. • What dif fer ence would you notice between the two in this case? Activity ______________ 7.4 • Automobiles are fitted with a device that shows the distance travelled. Such a device is known as an odometer . A car is driven fr om Bhubaneshwar to New Delhi. The difference between the final reading and the initial reading of the odometer is 1850 km. • Find the magnitude of the displacement between Bhubaneshwar and New Delhi by using the Road Map of India. The total path length covered by the object is OA + AC, that is 60 km + 35 km = 95 km. This is the distance covered by the object. To describe distance we need to specify only the numerical value and not the dir ection of motion. There are certain quantities which are described by specifying only their numerical values. The numerical value of a physical quantity is its magnitude. From this example, can you find out the distance of the final position C of the object from the initial position O? This difference will give you the numerical value of the displacement of the object from O to C thr ough A. The shortest distance measured from the initial to the final position of an object is known as the displacement. Can the magnitude of the displacement be equal to the distance travelled by an object? Consider the example given in (Fig. 7.1). For motion of the object from O to A, the distance covered is 60 km and the magnitude of displacement is also 60 km. During its motion fro