e. The speed of an object need not be constant. In most cases, objects will be in non-uniform motion. Ther efore, we describe the rate of motion of such objects in ter ms of their average speed. The average speed of an object is obtained by dividing the total distance travelled by the total time taken. That is, average speed = Total distance travelled Total time taken If an object travels a distance s in time t then its speed v is, v = s t (7.1) Let us understand this by an example. A car travels a distance of 100 km in 2 h. Its average speed is 50 km h –1. The car might not have travelled at 50 km h –1 all the time. Sometimes it might have travelled faster and sometimes slower than this. Example 7.1 An object travels 16 m in 4 s and then another 16 m in 2 s. What is the average speed of the object? Solution: Total distance travelled by the object = 16 m + 16 m = 32 m Total time taken = 4 s + 2 s = 6 s Average speed = Total distance travelled Total time taken = 32 m 6 s = 5.33 m s–1 Therefore, the average speed of the object is 5.33 m s–1. 7.2.1 SPEED WITH DIRECTION The rate of motion of an object can be mor e comprehensive if we specify its dir ection of motion along with its speed. The quantity that specifies both these aspects is called velocity. Velocity is the speed of an object moving in a definite dir ection. The velocity of an object can be uniform or variable. It can be changed by changing the object’s speed, dir ection of motion or both. When an object is moving along a straight line at a variable speed, we can expr ess the magnitude of its rate of motion in ter ms of average velocity. It is calculated in the same way as we calculate average speed. In case the velocity of the object is changing at a unifor m rate, then average velocity is given by the arithmetic mean of initial velocity and final velocity for a given period of time. That is, average velocity = initial velocity + final velocity 2 Mathematically, v av = u + v 2 (7.2) where vav is the average velocity, u is the initial velocity and v is the final velocity of the object. Speed and velocity have the same units, that is, m s–1 or m/s. Activity ______________ 7.6 • Measure the time it takes you to walk from your house to your bus stop or the school. If you consider that your average walking speed is 4 km h –1, estimate the distance of the bus stop or school from your house. Reprint 2025-26
Look at the situations given in Pig. 7.2. 1f Total distance travelled the bowling speed is 143 km he'in Fig. 7.2(a) Average speed = romp ume taken what does it mean? What do you understand ° . from the signboard in Fig. 7.2(b)? 32m Different objects may take different = Gye 27533 ms! amounts of time to cover a given distance. _ . Some of them move fast and some move Therefore, the average speed of the object oy is§.33 mst. slowly. The rate at which objects move can be different. Also, different objects can move at the same rate. One of the ways of = 7.94 SpEED WITH DIRECTION measuring the rate of motion of an object is to find out the distance travelled by the object — The rate of motion of an object can be more in unit time. This quantity is referred to as comprehensive if we specify its direction of speed. The SI unit of speed is metre per — motion along with its speed. The quantity that second. This is represented by the symbol — specifies both these aspects is called velocity. ms tor m/s. The other units of speed include Velocity is the speed of an object moving in a centimetre per second (em s"') and kilometre — definite direction. The velocity of an object per hour (km h7'). To specify the speed ofan can be uniform or variable. It can be changed object, we require only its magnitude. The — by changing the object's speed. direction of speed of an object need not be constant. In motion or both. When an object is moving most cases, objects will be in non-uniform — along a straight line at a variable speed, we motion. Therefore, we describe the rate of — can express the magnitude of its rate of motion of such objects in terms of their — motion in terms of average velocity. It is average speed. The average speed of an object caleulated in the same way as we calculate is obtained by dividing the total distance average speed. travelled by the total time taken. That is, In case the velocity of the object is Total distance travelled changing at a uniform rate. then average average speed = Total time taken velocity is given by the arithmetic mean of Ifan object travels a distance sin time / then initial velocity and final velocity for a given its speed vis, period of time. That is. s average velocity initial velocity + final velocity bey (7.1) AVeTAe 5 2 Let us understand this by an example. A uty car travels a distance of 100 km in 2 h. Its Mathematically, v= {7.2) average speed is 50 km h"'. The car might , 2 not have travelled at 50 km h7! all the time. | where vis the average velocity, u is the initial Sometimes it might have travelled faster and — velocity and vis the final velocity of the object. sometimes slower than this. Speed and velocity have the same units. that is, ms or m/s. Example 7.1 An object travels 16 min 4s oe and then another 16 m in 2s. What is Activity Se 7.6 the average speed of the object’? ¢ Measure the time it takes you to walk Solution: from your house to your bus stop or the school. If you consider that your Total distance travelled by the object = average walking speed is 4 km h'. 16m + 16m=32m estimate the distance of the bus stop Total time taken =48+2s=658 or school from your house. Monox 75 Reprint 2025-26 :

[Page 5]
SCIENCE76 76767676 = 50 km 1000m 1h × × h 1km 3600s = 13.9 m s–1 The average speed of the car is 50 km h–1 or 13.9 m s–1. Exampl ExamplExamplExamplExample 7.e 7.e 7. e 7.e 7.3 3333 Usha swims in a 90 m long pool. She covers 180 m in one minute by swimming from one end to the other and back along the same straight path. Find the average speed and average velocity of Usha. Solution: Solution:Solution: Solution:Solution: Total distance covered by Usha in 1 min is 180 m. Displacement of Usha in 1 min = 0 m Average speed = Total distance covered Totaltimetaken = 180m 180 m 1 min= × 1min 1min 60s = 3 m s-1 Average velocity = Displacement Totaltimetaken = 0m 60 s = 0 m s–1 The average speed of Usha is 3 m s –1 and her average velocity is 0 m s–1. 7.3 Rate of Change of Velocity During uniform motion of an object along a straight line, the velocity remains constant with time. In this case, the change in velocity of the object for any time interval is zero. However, in non-uniform motion, velocity varies with time. I t has dif ferent values at different instants and at dif ferent points of the path. Thus, the change in velocity of the object during any time interval is not zero. Can we now express the change in velocity of an object? Activity ActivityActivity ActivityActivity 7.7 7.77.7 7.77.7 • At a time when it is cloudy, there may be frequent thunder and lightning. The sound of thunder takes some time to reach you after you see the lightning. • Can you answer why this happens? • Measure this time interval using a digital wrist watch or a stop watch. • Calculate the distance of the nearest point of lightning. (Speed of sound in air = 346 m s-1.) uestions 1. Distinguish between speed and velocity. 2. Under what condition(s) is the magnitude of average velocity of an object equal to its average speed? 3. What does the odometer of an automobile measure? 4. What does the path of an object look like when it is in unifor m motion? 5. During an experiment, a signal from a spaceship r eached the ground station in five minutes. What was the distance of the spaceship fr om the gr ound station? The signal travels at the speed of light, that is, 3 × 10 8 m s–1. Exampl ExamplExampl ExamplExample 7.2 e 7.2 e 7.2 e 7.2 e 7.2 The odometer of a car reads 2000 km at the start of a trip and 2400 km at the end of the trip. If the trip took 8 h, calculate the average speed of t