peed Example 7.4 Starting from a stationary 40 km h- in 10 minutes, Pind position, Rahul paddles his bicycle to its acecleration, Monox 77 Reprint 2025-26

[Page 7]
SCIENCE78 78787878 7.4 Graphical Representation of Motion Graphs provide a convenient method to present basic information about a variety of events. For example, in the telecast of a one-day cricket match, vertical bar graphs show the run rate of a team in each over. As you have studied in mathematics, a straight line graph helps in solving a linear equation having two variables. To describe the motion of an object, we can use line graphs. In this case, line graphs show dependence of one physical quantity, such as distance or velocity, on another quantity, such as time. 7.4.1 DISTANCE–TIME GRAPHS The change in the position of an object with time can be represented on the distance-time graph adopting a convenient scale of choice. In this graph, time is taken along the x–axis and distance is taken along the y-axis. Distance-time graphs can be employed under various conditions where objects move with uniform speed, non-uniform speed, remain at rest etc. Fig. 7.3: Fig. 7.3:Fig. 7.3: Fig. 7.3:Fig. 7.3: Distance-time graph of an object moving with uniform speed We know that when an object travels equal distances in equal intervals of time, it moves with uniform speed. This shows that the distance travelled by the object is directly proportional to time taken. Thus, for uniform speed, a graph of distance travelled against time is a straight line, as shown in Fig. 7.3. The portion OB of the graph shows that the distance is increasing at a uniform rate. Note that, you can also use the term uniform velocity in place of uniform speed if you take the magnitude of displacement equal to the distance travelled by the object along the y-axis. We can use the distance-time graph to determine the speed of an object. To do so, consider a small part AB of the distance-time graph shown in Fig 7.3. Draw a line parallel to the x-axis from point A and another line parallel to the y-axis from point B. These two lines meet each other at point C to form a triangle ABC. Now, on the graph, A C denotes the time interval (t2 – t1) while BC corresponds to the distance (s2 – s1). We can see from the graph that as the object moves from the point A to B, it covers a distance ( s2 – s1) in time (t2 – t1). The speed, v of the object, therefore can be represented as = 2 1 2 1 – – s s t t (7.4) We can also plot the distance-time graph for accelerated motion. Table 7.2 shows the distance travelled by a car in a time interval of two seconds. Table 7.2: Distance travelled by aTable 7.2: Distance travelled by aTable 7.2: Distance travelled by aTable 7.2: Distance travelled by aTable 7.2: Distance travelled by a car at regular time intervalscar at regular time intervalscar at regular time intervalscar at regular time intervalscar at regular time intervals Time in secondsTime in secondsTime in secondsTime in secondsTime in seconds Distance in metresDistance in metresDistance in metresDistance in metresDistance in metres 0 0 2 1 4 4 6 9 8 16 10 25 12 36 v Reprint 2025-26
74 Graphical Representation of distance travelled by the object is directly . proportional to time taken. Thus, for uniform Motion speed, a graph of distance travelled against ; ; tine is a straight line, as shown in Fig. 7.3. Graphs provide a convenient method to The portion OB of the graph shows that the present basic information about a variety of distance is increasing at a uniform rate. Note events. For example, in the telecast of a (hat, yon can also use the term uniform one-day cricket match, vertical bar graphs velocity in place of uniform speed if you take show the run rate of a team in each over. AS the magnitude of displacement equal to the you have studied in mathematics, a straight) distance travelled by the object along the line graph helps in solving a linear equation y-axis. ° having two variables. ; We can use the distance-time graph to To describe the motion of an object. we determine the speed of an object. To do so. can use line graphs. In this case. line graphs consider a small part AB of the distance-time show dependence of one physical quantity, graph shown in Fig 7.3. Draw a line parallel such as distance or velocity, on another to the x-axis from point A and another line quantity, such as time. parallel to the y-axis from point B. These two lines meet each other at point C to form a 7.4.1 DIsTANCE-TIME GRAPHS triangle ABC. Now, on the graph, AC denotes the time interval (¢,- 4) while BC corresponds The change in the position of an object with “deae sen tw ) ate SI = to the distance (s,- 5). We can see from the time can be represented on the distance-time . eel . . graph that as the object moves from the point graph adopting a convenient scale of choice. A to B., it covers a distance (s,- s) in time In this graph, time is taken along the x-axis A Se aca : - . - (,- ¢,). The speed, v of the object, therefore and distance is taken along the y-axis. 2 . ae . - . can be represented as Distance-time graphs can be employed under various conditions where objects move with Ss, 8, uniform speed, non-unifortn speed, remain ve 4 (7.4) at rest ete. 7 We can also plot the distance-time graph a a _. for accelerated motion. Table 7.2 shows the Sueesesnssssssuccsccssncssssunen: distance travelled by a car in a time interval SR pnaeseess e558 seeaenasene ye . . “ aOF tint Et ico i: PELInn! of two seconds. g Pandy 1, as paso 2 20 mt car at regular time intervals SSSSSSSSSSR S. 200 ceesaseesn ss seen! BS fee 10. ea cae Time in seconds | Distance in metres o 20 40 60 Time (min) 2 1 4 4 Fig. 7.3: Disiance-time graph of an object moving 6 9 with uniform speed 8 16 We know that when an object travels equal 10 25 distances in equal intervals of time, it moves with uniform speed. This shows that the 12 36 78 Scene Reprint 2025-26

[Page 8]
MOTION 79 The distance-time graph for the motion of the car is shown in Fig. 7.4. Note that the shape of this graph is different from the earlier distance-time graph (Fig. 7.3) for uniform motion. The nature of this graph shows non- linear variation of the distance travelled by the car with time. Thus, the graph shown in Fig 7.4 represents motion with non-uniform speed. 7.4.2 VELOCITY-TIME GRAPHS The variation in velocity with time for an object moving in a straight line can be represented by a velocity-time graph. In this graph, time is represented along the x- axis and the velocity Fig. 7.4: Distance-time graph for a car moving with non-uniform speed Fig. 7.5: Velocity-time graph for uniform motion of a car is represented along the y-axis. If the object moves at uniform velocity, the height of its velocity-time graph will not change with time (Fig. 7.5). It will be a straight line parallel to the x-axis. Fig. 7.5 shows the velocity-time graph for a car moving with uniform velocity of 40 km h–1. We know that the product of velocity and time give displacement of an object moving with uniform velocity. The ar ea enclosed by velocity-time graph and the time axis will be equal to the magnitude of the displacement. To know the distance moved by the car between time t 1 and t2 using Fig. 7.5, draw perpendiculars from the points corresponding to the time t1 and t2 on the graph. The velocity of 40 km h–1 is represented by the height AC or BD and the time (t2 – t1) is represented by the length AB. So, the distance s moved by the car in time (t2 – t1) can be expressed as s = AC × CD = [(40 km h–1) × (t2 – t1) h] = 40 (t2– t1) km = area of the rectangle ABDC (shaded in Fig. 7.5). We can also study about unifor mly accelerated motion by plotting its velocity– time graph. Consider a car being driven along a straight road for testing its engine. Suppose a person sitting next to the driver records its velocity after every 5 seconds by noting the reading of the speedometer of the car . The velocity of the car , in km h –1 as well as in m s–1, at 