heck whether the direction in which the stone moves remains the same or not. Reprint 2025-26
Activity. 7.0 If you carefully note. on being released the stone moves along a straight line ¢ Take a piece of thread and tie a small tangential to the circular path. This is piece of stone at one of its ends, Move because once the stone is released, it the stone to deseribe a circular path - - a continues to move along the direction it has with constant speed by holding the . ae thread at the other end, as shown in been moving at that instant. This shows that Fig. 7.9. the direction of motion changed at every point go me when the stone was moving along the circular foun a path. k ? When an athlete throws a hammer or a a ee discus in a sports meet, he/she holds the i a hammer or the discus in his/her hand and if iL gives ita circular motion by rotating his/ . . ; ; her own body. Once released in the desired Fig. 7.9: A stone describing a cireular path with direction, the hammer or discus moves in a velocity of constant magnitude. a . the direction in which it was moving at the ¢ Now, let the stone go by releasing the lime it was released, just like the piece of thread. ; ; ; stone in the activity described above. There e Can you tell the direction in which are many more familiar examples of objects the stone moves after it is released? . - - moving under uniform circular motion, e By repeating the activity for a few I Stk ttt ltt times and releasing the stone at such as the motion of the moon and the different positions of the circular earth, a satellite in a circular orbit around path, check whether the direetion in the earth, a cyclist on a circular track at which the stone moves remains the constant speed and so on. same or not. @ FXO you have ace” se a t oye? a” * learn ° Motion is a change of position; it can be described in terms of the distance moved or the displacement. ° The motion of an object could be uniform or non-uniform depending on whether its velocity is constant or changing. ° The speed of an object is the distance covered per unit time, and velocity is the displacement per unit time. ° The acceleration of an object is the change in velocity per unit time. e Uniform and non-uniform motions of objects can be shown through graphs. ° The motion of an object moving at uniform acceleration can be described with the help of the following equations, namely veutat s=uttwar 2as = - Ww 84 Sewack Reprint 2025-26

[Page 14]
MOTION 85 8585 8585 where u is initial velocity of the object, which moves with uniform acceleration a for time t, v is its final velocity and s is the distance it travelled in time t. • If an object moves in a circular path with uniform speed, its motion is called uniform circular motion. Exercises 1. An athlete completes one round of a circular track of diameter 200 m in 40 s. What will be the distance covered and the displacement at the end of 2 minutes 20 s? 2. Joseph jogs from one end A to the other end B of a straight 300 m road in 2 minutes 30 seconds and then turns around and jogs 100 m back to point C in another 1 minute. What are Joseph’s average speeds and velocities in jogging (a) from A to B and (b) from A to C? 3. Abdul, while driving to school, computes the average speed for his trip to be 20 km h –1. On his return trip along the same route, there is less traffic and the average speed is 30 km h –1. What is the average speed for Abdul’s trip? 4. A motorboat starting from rest on a lake accelerates in a straight line at a constant rate of 3.0 m s –2 for 8.0 s. How far does the boat travel during this time? 5. A driver of a car travelling at 52 km h –1 applies the brakes Shade the area on the graph that represents the distance travelled by the car during the period. (b) Which part of the graph represents uniform motion of the car? 6. Fig 7.10 shows the distance-time graph of three objects A,B and C. Study the graph and answer the following questions: Fig. 7.10 Fig. 7.10Fig. 7.10 Fig. 7.10Fig. 7.10 Reprint 2025-26
where uw is initial velocity of the object, which moves with uniform acceleration a for time f, v is its final velocity and sis the distance it travelled in time ¢ ° If an object moves in a circular path with uniform speed, its motion is called uniform circular motion. ron = Exercises ' TT 1! Lee — 1. An athlete completes one round of a circular track of a3 diameter 200 m in 40 s. What will be the distance covered and the displacement at the end of 2 minutes 20 s? 2. Joseph jogs from one end A to the other end B of a straight 300 m road in 2 minutes 30 seconds and then turns around and jogs 100 m back to point C in another 1 minute. What are Joseph's average speeds and velocities in jogging (a) from A to B and (b) from A to C? 3. Abdul. while driving to school. computes the average speed for his trip to be 20 km h'!. On his return trip along the same route, there is less traffic and the average speed is 30 km h'. What is the average speed for Abdul's trip? 4. A motorboat starting from rest on a lake accelerates in a straight line at a constant rate of 3.0 m s? for 8.0 s. How far does the boat travel during this time? 5. A driver of a car travelling at 52 km h'! applies the brakes Shade the area on the graph that represents the distance travelled by the car during the period. (b) Which part of the graph represents uniform motion of the car? 6. Fig 7.10 shows the distance-time graph of three objects A.B and C. Study the graph and answer the following questions: 12. SS 5 See —7 = 2SRESOGrs 4eneeesseersess v seeeeeser .eessssssseesrras Py SSSSER SP 4888808 eee eeeReres a eee 748880808000 eR8eRRRRs a4 = oer _a7 2008080808 ee00eRRRRss 3 Ca .~ eee Sysseceaseucessccsseccncss Ba EEE mmm Q 04 08 #$%412 16 time (hour)——> Fig. 7.10 Monox 85 Reprint 2025-26

[Page 15]
SCIENCE86 (a) Which of the three is travelling the fastest? (b) Are all three ever at the same point on the road? (c) How far has C travelled when B passes A? (d) How far has B travelled by the time it passes C? 7. A ball is gently dropped from a height of 20 m. If its velocity increases uniformly at the rate of 10 m s-2, with what velocity will it strike the ground? After what time will it strike the ground? 8. The speed-time graph for a car is shown is Fig. 7.11. (a) Find how far does the car travel in the first 4 seconds. Shade the area on the graph that represents the distance travelled by the car during the period. (b) Which part of the graph represents uniform motion of the car? 9. State which of the following situations are possible and give an example for each of these: (a) an object with a constant acceleration but with zero velocity (b) an object moving with an acceleration but with uniform speed. (c) an object moving in a certain direction with an acceleration in the perpendicular direction. 10. An artificial satellite is moving in a circular orbit of radius 42250 km. Calculate its speed if it takes 24 hours to revolve around the earth. Fig. 7.11 Reprint 2025-26
(a) Which of the three is travelling the fastest? (b) Are all three ever at the same point on the road’? (ce) How far has C travelled when B passes A? (d) How far has B travelled by the time it passes C? 7. Aball is gently dropped from a height of 20 m. If its velocity increases uniformly at the rate of 10 ms’, with what velocity will it strike the ground’? After what time will it strike the ground? 8. The speed-time graph for a car is shown is Fig. 7.11. = 8 S0CSeeees seeeseeeseeserces' i seeueeeeressesssss a 6 SOSSS8S8EF=—.ceees & bees I: (ieee Eee a AVE ae id 2 4 6 8 10 Time (s) Fig. 7.11 (a) Find how far does the car travel in the first 4 seconds. Shade the area on the graph that represents the distance travelled by the car during the period. (b) Which part of the graph represents uniform motion of the car? 9. State which of the following situations are possible and give an example for each of these: (a) an object with a constant acceleration but with zero velocity {b) an object moving 