GRAVITATION 101 9.1.1 UNIVERSAL LAW OF GRAVITATION Every object in the universe attracts every other object with a force which is proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional to the squar e of the distance between them. The for ce is along the line joining the centres of two objects. In the absence of this force, the stone flies off along a straight line. This straight line will be a tangent to the circular path. More to know Tangent to a circle A straight line that meets the circle at one and only one point is called a tangent to the cir cle. Straight line ABC is a tangent to the cir cle at point B. The motion of the moon around the earth is due to the centripetal force. The centripetal force is provided by the for ce of attraction of the earth. If there wer e no such for ce, the moon would pursue a unifor m straight line motion. It is seen that a falling apple is attracted towards the earth. Does the apple attract the earth? If so, we do not see the earth moving towards an apple. Why? According to the third law of motion, the apple does attract the earth. But accor ding to the second law of motion, for a given force, acceleration is inversely pr oportional to the mass of an object [Eq. (8.4)]. The mass of an apple is negligibly small compared to that of the earth. So, we do not see the earth moving towards the apple. Extend the same argument for why the earth does not move towards the moon. In our solar system, all the planets go around the Sun. By ar guing the same way, we can say that there exists a force between the Sun and the planets. From the above facts Newton concluded that not only does the earth attract an apple and the moon, but all objects in the universe attract each other. This force of attraction between objects is called the gravitational force. G 2 Mm F = d Fig. 9.2: The gravitational force between two uniform objects is directed along the line joining their centres. Let two objects A and B of masses M and m lie at a distance d from each other as shown in Fig. 9.2. Let the force of attraction between two objects be F . According to the universal law of gravitation, the for ce between two objects is directly proportional to the product of their masses. That is, F∝ M × m (9.1) And the force between two objects is inversely proportional to the squar e of the distance between them, that is, ∝ 2 1F d (9.2) Combining Eqs. (10.1) and (10.2), we get F ∝ 2 ×M m d (9.3) or, G 2 M × m F = d (9.4) where G is the constant of proportionality and is called the universal gravitation constant. By multiplying crosswise, Eq. (9.4) gives F × d 2 = G M × m Reprint 2025-26
In the absence of this force, the stone flies off — 9.1.1) UNIVERSAL LAW OF GRAVITATION along a straight line. This straight line will be a tangent to the circular path. Every object in the universe attracts every other object with a force which is proportional Tangent to a circle to the product of their masses and inversely " proportional to the square of the distance A b c between them. The force is along the line joining the centres of two objects. 2 ° S =< A B g s Astraight line that meets the circle at one and only one point is called a F=G6 Mm tangent to the circle. Straight line a ABC is a tangent to the circle at point B. Fig. 9.2: The gravitational force betweer two uniform objects is directed along the line The motion of the moon around the earth Joining their centres, is due to the centripetal force. The centripetal force is provided by the force of attraction of Let two objects A and B of masses Mand the earth. If there were no such force, the mlie ata distance dfrom each other as shown moon would pursue a uniform straight line — in Fig. 9.2. Let the force of attraction between motion. two objects be F. According to the universal It is seen that a falling apple is attracted law of gravitation, the force between two towards the earth. Does the apple attract the objects is directly proportional to the product earth? If so, we do not see the earth moving — of their masses. That is. towards an apple. Why’? Foo M xa 9.1) According to the third law of motion, the and the force between two objects is inversely apple does attract the earth. But according proportional to the square of the distance to the second law of motion, for a given force. between them, that is. acceleration is inversely proportional to the mass of an object (Eq. (8.4)]. The mass of an l apple is negligibly small compared to that of Pe we {9.2) the earth. So. we do not see the earth moving ‘ towards the apple. Extend the same argument Combining Eqs. (10.1) and (10.2), we get for why the earth does not move towards the moon. Mxim In our solar system, all the planets go Fo a? {9.3) around the Sun. By arguing the same way. we can say that there exists a force between ., Mxm the Sun and the planets. From the above facts OF. PEG r {9.4) Newton concluded that not only does the ‘ earth attract an apple and the moon, but all where Gis the constant of proportionality and objects in the universe attract each other. This is called the universal gravitation constant. force of attraction between objects is called By multiplying crosswise, Eq. (9.4) gives the gravitational force. Fxd?=GMxim GRAVITATION 101 Reprint 2025-26 :