SCIENCE110 What you have learnt • The law of gravitation states that the force of attraction between any two objects is proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them. The law applies to objects anywhere in the universe. Such a law is said to be universal. • Gravitation is a weak force unless large masses are involved. • The force of gravity decreases with altitude. It also varies on the surface of the earth, decreasing from poles to the equator. • The weight of a body is the for ce with which the earth attracts it. • The weight is equal to the pr oduct of mass and acceleration due to gravity. • The weight may vary from place to place but the mass stays constant. When a body is immersed fully or partially in a fluid, it experiences an upward force that is equal to the weight of the fluid displaced by it. Now, can you explain why a further decrease in the elongation of the string was not observed in activity 9.7, as the stone was fully immersed in water? Archimedes was a Greek scientist. He discovered the principle, subsequently named after him, after noticing that the water in a bathtub overflowed when he stepped into it. He ran through the streets shouting “Eureka!”, which means “I have got it”. This knowledge helped him to determine the purity of the gold in the crown made for the king. His work in the field of Geometry and Mechanics made him famous. His understanding of levers, pulleys, wheels- and-axle helped the Greek army in its war with Roman army. Archimedes Q Archimedes’ principle has many applications. It is used in designing ships and submarines. Lactometers, which are used to determine the purity of a sample of milk and hydrometers used for determining density of liquids, are based on this principle. uestions 1. You find your mass to be 42 kg on a weighing machine. Is your mass more or less than 42 kg? 2. You have a bag of cotton and an iron bar, each indicating a mass of 100 kg when measured on a weighing machine. In reality, one is heavier than other . Can you say which one is heavier and why? Reprint 2025-26
When a body is immersed tilly or partially Archimedes’ principle has many ina thiid, it experiences an upward torce that — applications. It is used in designing ships and is equal to the weight of the fluid displaced — submarines. Lactometers, which are used to by it. determine the purity of a sample of milk and Now, can you explain why a further hydrometers used for determining density of decrease in the elongation of the string was liquids, are based on this principle. not observed in activity 9.7, as the stone was fully immersed in water? N) westions Archimedes was a Greek scientist. He h You find vour mass fo he 42 ke discovered the principle, subsequently named ona weighing machine. IS) pur seme after him, after noticing that Mass MOLE OF less than 42 kx: Ps wees the water in a bathtub | | 2. You havea bag ofcotton and an ws overflowed when he stepped U) iron bar. cach indicading a mass a\ EM into it. He ran through the of 100 kg when measurcd on a NS MM streets shouting “Eureka!, weighing machine. fn reality, EE. 3 " & which means “I have got it”. one is heavier than other. Can ee " “ae fd This knowledge helped him to You sav which onc is heavier aca ee detennine the purity of the and why? Archimedes gold in the crown made for the king. His work in the field of Geometry and Mechanics made him famous. His understanding of levers, pulleys. wheels- and-axle helped the Greek army in its war with Roman army. (dS What @ FA. you have SN ats As, 1S Fy On b> = ae learnt — o ° The law of gravitation states that the force of attraction between any two objects is proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them. The law applies to objects anywhere in the universe. Such a law is said to be universal. ° Gravitation is a weak force unless large masses are involved. e The foree of gravity decreases with altitude. It also varies on the surface of the earth, decreasing from poles to the equator. ° The weight of a body is the force with which the earth attracts it. ° The weight is equal to the product of mass and acceleration due to gravity. ° The weight may vary from place to place but the mass stays constant. 110 Sewer, Reprint 2025-26