GRAVITATION 103 103103 103103 calculations, we can take g to be more or less constant on or near the earth. But for objects far from the earth, the acceleration due to gravitational for ce of earth is given by Eq. (9.7). 9.2.1 TO CALCULATE THE VALUE OF g To calculate the value of g, we should put the values of G, M and R in Eq. (9.9), namely, universal gravitational constant, G = 6.7 × 10–11 N m2 kg-2, mass of the earth, M = 6 × 1024 kg, and radius of the earth, R = 6.4 × 106 m. G 2 M g = R -11 2 -2 24 6 2 6.7 10 N m kg 6 10 kg= (6.4 10 m) × × × × = 9.8 m s–2. Thus, the value of acceleration due to gravity of the earth, g = 9.8 m s–2. 9.2.2 MOTION OF OBJECTS UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF GRAVITATIONAL FORCE OF THE EARTH Let us do an activity to understand whether all objects hollow or solid, big or small, will fall from a height at the same rate. Activity 9.3 • Take a sheet of paper and a stone. Drop them simultaneously from the first floor of a building. Observe whether both of them reach the ground simultaneously. • We see that paper reaches the ground little later than the stone. This happens because of air resistance. The air offers resistance due to friction to the motion of the falling objects. The r esistance offered by air to the paper is more than the resistance offered to the stone. If we do the experiment in a glass jar from which air has been sucked out, the paper and the stone would fall at the same rate. change in the velocity of falling objects? While falling, there is no change in the direction of motion of the objects. But due to the earth’s attraction, there will be a change in the magnitude of the velocity. Any change in velocity involves acceleration. Whenever an object falls towards the earth, an acceleration is involved. This acceleration is due to the earth’s gravitational for ce. Ther efore, this acceleration is called the acceleration due to the gravitational for ce of the earth (or acceleration due to gravity). It is denoted by g. The unit of g is the same as that of acceleration, that is, m s–2. We know from the second law of motion that for ce is the pr oduct of mass and acceleration. Let the mass of the stone in activity 9.2 be m. We already know that there is acceleration involved in falling objects due to the gravitational force and is denoted by g. Therefore the magnitude of the gravitational force F will be equal to the pr oduct of mass and acceleration due to the gravitational force, that is, F = m g (9.6) From Eqs. (9.4) and (9.6) we have 2= G ×M m m g d or G 2 M g = d (9.7) where M is the mass of the earth, and d is the distance between the object and the earth. Let an object be on or near the surface of the earth. The distance d in Eq. (9.7) will be equal to R, the radius of the earth. Thus, for objects on or near the surface of the earth, G 2 M × m mg = R (9.8) G 2 M g = R (9.9) The earth is not a perfect sphere. As the radius of the earth increases from the poles to the equator, the value of g becomes greater at the poles than at the equator . For most Reprint 2025-26
change in the velocity of falling objects? While calculations, we can take gto be more or less falling, there is no change in the direction of — constant on or near the earth. But for objects motion of the objects. But due to the earth’s — far from the earth, the acceleration due to attraction, there will be a change in the — gravitational force of earth is given by magnitude of the velocity. Any change in Eq. (9.7). velocity involves acceleration. Whenever an object falls towards the earth, an acceleration — 9.2.1. To CALCULATE THE VALUE OF g is involved. This acceleration is due to the . earth’s gravitational force. Therefore, this To calculate the value of g. we should put the acceleration is called the acceleration due to — Values of G, Mand R in Eq. (9.9), namely, the gravitational force of the earth (or universal gravitational constant, G =6.7 x10"! acceleration due to gravity). It is denoted by — Nim’ kg’, mass of the earth, M= 6 « 107 kg, g. The unit of g is the same as that of | and radius of the earth, R= 6.4 « 10° m. acceleration, that is, ms. M We know from the second law of motion g2G i, that foree is the product of mass and R acceleration. Let the mass of the stone in . Wane ta et gs 24 activity 9.2 be m. We already know that there = BF x1 Nun kg” 26x10" kg is acceleration involved in falling objects due (6.4 «10° my’ to the gravitational force and is denoted by g. =9.8ms?. Therefore the magnitude of the gravitational . force F will be equal to the product of mass Thus, the value of acceleration due to gravity and acceleration due to the gravitational of the earth, g= 9.8m s”. force, that is, Femg (9.6) 9.2.2, MOTION OF OBJECTS UNDER THE From Eqs. (9.4) and (9.6) we have INFLUENCE OF GRAVITATIONAL Mxm FORCE OF THE EARTH mgeG 2 d Let us do an activity to understand whether all objects hollow or solid, big or small, will or G=G . (9.7) fall from a height at the same rate. C where Mis the mass of the earth, and dts the Activity 3 distance between the object and the earth. ¢ Take a sheet of paper and a stone. Let an object be on or near the surface of Drop them simultaneously from the the earth. The distance d in Eq. (9.7) will be first floor of a building. Observe equal to R, the radius of the earth. Thus, for whether both of them reach the objects on or near the surface of the earth, ground simultaneously. Mxm . We see that paper reaches the ground mg =G ; (9.8) little later than the stone. This happens Re hecause of air resistance. The air offers resistance duc to friction to the motion g=G M (9.9) of the falling objects. The resistance ~ Rr’ “ offered by air to the paper is more than the resistance offered to the stone. If The earth is not a perfect sphere. As the we do the experiment in a glass jar radius of the earth increases from the poles to from which air has been sucked out, the equator, the value of ghecomes greater at the paper and the stone would fall at the poles than at the equator. For most the same rate. GRAVITANON 103 Reprint 2025-26 :