GRAVITATION 109 • Observe what happens to elongation of the string or the r eading on the balance. You will find that the elongation of the string or the reading of the balance decreases as the stone is gradually lowered in the water. However, no further change is observed once the stone gets fully immersed in the water. What do you infer from the decrease in the extension of the string or the reading of the spring balance? We know that the elongation produced in the string or the spring balance is due to the weight of the stone. Since the extension decreases once the stone is lowered in water, it means that some force acts on the stone in upward direction. As a result, the net force on the string decreases and hence the elongation also decr eases. As discussed earlier , this upward force exerted by water is known as the force of buoyancy. What is the magnitude of the buoyant force experienced by a body? Is it the same in all fluids for a given body? Do all bodies in a given fluid experience the same buoyant force? The answer to these questions is contained in Archimedes’ principle, stated as follows: Activity ______________ 9.6 • Take a beaker filled with water . • Take a piece of cork and an iron nail of equal mass. • Place them on the surface of water. • Observe what happens. The cork floats while the nail sinks. This happens because of the dif ference in their densities. The density of a substance is defined as the mass per unit volume. The density of cork is less than the density of water. This means that the upthrust of water on the cork is greater than the weight of the cork. So it floats (Fig. 9.5). The density of an iron nail is more than the density of water . This means that the upthrust of water on the iron nail is less than the weight of the nail. So it sinks. Therefore objects of density less than that of a liquid float on the liquid. The objects of density greater than that of a liquid sink in the liquid. uestions 1. Why is it difficult to hold a school bag having a strap made of a thin and strong string? 2. What do you mean by buoyancy? 3. Why does an object float or sink when placed on the sur face of water? 9.6 Archimedes’ Principle Activity ______________ 9.7 • Take a piece of stone and tie it to one end of a rubber string or a spring balance. • Suspend the stone by holding the balance or the string as shown in Fig. 9.6 (a). • Note the elongation of the string or the reading on the spring balance due to the weight of the stone. • Now, slowly dip the stone in the water in a container as shown in Fig. 9.6 (b). Fig. 9.6: (a) Observe the elongation of the rubber string due to the weight of a piece of stone suspended from it in air. (b) The elongation decr eases as the stone is immersed in water. (a) (b) Q Reprint 2025-26
Activity 9 ; —_ ¢ ‘Take a heaker filled with water. _ \y e Take a piece of cork and an iron nail of equal mass. . Place them on the surface of water. . Observe what happens. YT | | The cork floats while the nail sinks. This B happens because of the difference in their densities. The density of a substance is - defined as the mass per unit volume. The fa) density of cork is less than the density of water. This means that the upthrust of water Z on the cork is greater than the weight of the ty cork, So it floats (Fig. 9.5). wy The density of an iron nail is more than the density of water. This means that the Fig. 9.6: fa} Observe the elongation of the rubber upthrust of water on the iron nail is less than string due fo the weight ofa piece of stone . + suspended froin it in air. (b) The elongation the weight of the nail. So it sinks. decreases as the stone is inminersed Therefore objects of density less than that in water. of a liquid float on the liquid. The objects of density greater than that of a liquid sink in e = QOhserve what happens to clongation the liquid. of the string or the reading on the halance. (" Westin You will find that the elongation of the string \ 1. Whvis it ditlicult to hold a school or the reading of the balance decreases as the | bag having a strap made of a thin stone is gradually lowered in the water. However, and strong string? no further change is observed once the stone 19 What do vou mean by buovancv? gets fully immersed in the water. What do you UJ 3 Why does an object float or sink infer from the decrease in the extension of the when placed on the surtace ot string or the reading of the spring balance? water? We know that the elongation produced in the string or the spring balance is due to the 9.6 Archimedes’ Principle weight of the stone. Since the extension decreases once the stone is lowered in water, Activit 9.7 it means that some force acts on the stone in y —________ 7. upward direction. As a result, the net force on * Take a piece of stone and tie it to one the string decreases and hence the elongation end of a rubber string or a spring also decreases. As discussed earlier, this balance. upward force exerted by water is known as e Suspend the stone by holding the the force of buoyancy. me oe tah the string as shown in What is the magnitude of the buoyant . Note the elongation of the string or force experienced by a body? Is it the same the reading on the spring balance due in all fluids for a given body? Do all bodies to the weight of the stone. in a given fluid experience the same buoyant . Now, slowly dip the stone in the water force? The answer to these questions is in a container as shown in contained in Archimedes’ principle, stated as Fig. 9.6 (b). follows: GRAVITATION 109 Reprint 2025-26 :