SCIENCE84 Activity ActivityActivity ActivityActivity 7.11 7.117.11 7.117.11 • Take a piece of thread and tie a small piece of stone at one of its ends. Move the stone to describe a circular path with constant speed by holding the thread at the other end, as shown in Fig. 7.9. If you carefully note, on being released the stone moves along a straight line tangential to the circular path. This is because once the stone is released, it continues to move along the direction it has been moving at that instant. This shows that the direction of motion changed at every point when the stone was moving along the circular path. When an athlete throws a hammer or a discus in a sports meet, he/she holds the hammer or the discus in his/her hand and gives it a circular motion by rotating his/ her own body. Once released in the desired direction, the hammer or discus moves in the direction in which it was moving at the time it was released, just like the piece of stone in the activity described above. There are many more familiar examples of objects moving under uniform circular motion, such as the motion of the moon and the earth, a satellite in a circular orbit around the earth, a cyclist on a circular track at constant speed and so on. What you have learnt • Motion is a change of position; it can be described in terms of the distance moved or the displacement. • The motion of an object could be uniform or non-uniform depending on whether its velocity is constant or changing. • The speed of an object is the distance covered per unit time, and velocity is the displacement per unit time. • The acceleration of an object is the change in velocity per unit time. • Uniform and non-uniform motions of objects can be shown through graphs. • The motion of an object moving at uniform acceleration can be described with the help of the following equations, namely v = u + at s = ut + ½ at2 2as = v2 – u2 Fig. 7.9: A stone describing a circular path with a velocity of constant magnitude. • Now, let the stone go by releasing the thread. • Can you tell the direction in which the stone moves after it is released? • By repeating the activity for a few times and releasing the stone at different positions of the circular path, check whether the direction in which the stone moves remains the same or not. Reprint 2025-26
Activity. 7.0 If you carefully note. on being released the stone moves along a straight line ¢ Take a piece of thread and tie a small tangential to the circular path. This is piece of stone at one of its ends, Move because once the stone is released, it the stone to deseribe a circular path - - a continues to move along the direction it has with constant speed by holding the . ae thread at the other end, as shown in been moving at that instant. This shows that Fig. 7.9. the direction of motion changed at every point go me when the stone was moving along the circular foun a path. k ? When an athlete throws a hammer or a a ee discus in a sports meet, he/she holds the i a hammer or the discus in his/her hand and if iL gives ita circular motion by rotating his/ . . ; ; her own body. Once released in the desired Fig. 7.9: A stone describing a cireular path with direction, the hammer or discus moves in a velocity of constant magnitude. a . the direction in which it was moving at the ¢ Now, let the stone go by releasing the lime it was released, just like the piece of thread. ; ; ; stone in the activity described above. There e Can you tell the direction in which are many more familiar examples of objects the stone moves after it is released? . - - moving under uniform circular motion, e By repeating the activity for a few I Stk ttt ltt times and releasing the stone at such as the motion of the moon and the different positions of the circular earth, a satellite in a circular orbit around path, check whether the direetion in the earth, a cyclist on a circular track at which the stone moves remains the constant speed and so on. same or not. @ FXO you have ace” se a t oye? a” * learn ° Motion is a change of position; it can be described in terms of the distance moved or the displacement. ° The motion of an object could be uniform or non-uniform depending on whether its velocity is constant or changing. ° The speed of an object is the distance covered per unit time, and velocity is the displacement per unit time. ° The acceleration of an object is the change in velocity per unit time. e Uniform and non-uniform motions of objects can be shown through graphs. ° The motion of an object moving at uniform acceleration can be described with the help of the following equations, namely veutat s=uttwar 2as = - Ww 84 Sewack Reprint 2025-26