7.1.1 MOTION ALONG A STRAIGHT LINE The simplest type of motion is the motion along a straight line. W e shall first lear n to describe this by an example. Consider the motion of an object moving along a straight path. The object starts its jour ney fr om O which is tr eated as its r efer ence point (Fig. 7.1). Let A, B and C represent the position of the object at different instants. At first, the object moves through C and B and reaches A. Then it moves back along the same path and reaches C through B. are used to describe the overall motion of an object and to locate its final position with reference to its initial position at a given time. Activity ______________ 7.3 • Take a metre scale and a long rope. • Walk from one corner of a basket-ball court to its oppposite cor ner along its sides. • Measure the distance cover ed by you and magnitude of the displacement. • What dif fer ence would you notice between the two in this case? Activity ______________ 7.4 • Automobiles are fitted with a device that shows the distance travelled. Such a device is known as an odometer . A car is driven fr om Bhubaneshwar to New Delhi. The difference between the final reading and the initial reading of the odometer is 1850 km. • Find the magnitude of the displacement between Bhubaneshwar and New Delhi by using the Road Map of India. The total path length covered by the object is OA + AC, that is 60 km + 35 km = 95 km. This is the distance covered by the object. To describe distance we need to specify only the numerical value and not the dir ection of motion. There are certain quantities which are described by specifying only their numerical values. The numerical value of a physical quantity is its magnitude. From this example, can you find out the distance of the final position C of the object from the initial position O? This difference will give you the numerical value of the displacement of the object from O to C thr ough A. The shortest distance measured from the initial to the final position of an object is known as the displacement. Can the magnitude of the displacement be equal to the distance travelled by an object? Consider the example given in (Fig. 7.1). For motion of the object from O to A, the distance covered is 60 km and the magnitude of displacement is also 60 km. During its motion from O to A and back to B, the distance covered Fig. 7.1: Positions of an object on a straight line path = 60 km + 25 km = 85 km while the magnitude of displacement = 35 km. Thus, the magnitude of displacement (35 km) is not equal to the path length (85 km). Further, we will notice that the magnitude of the displacement for a course of motion may be zero but the corresponding distance covered is not zero. If we consider the object to travel back to O, the final position concides with the initial position, and therefore, the displacement is zero. However, the distance covered in this journey is OA + AO = 60 km + 60 km = 120 km. Thus, two different physical quantities—the distance and the displacement, MOTION 73 Reprint 2025-26
7.11 MOTION ALONG A STRAIGHT LINE = 60 km + 25 km = 85 km while the magnitude of displacement = 35 km. Thus, the magnitude The simplest type of motion is the motion — of displacement (35 km) is not equal to the path along a straight line. We shall first learn to length (85 km). Further, we will notice that the describe this by an example. Consider the — magnitude of the displacement for a course of motion of an object moving along a straight |= motion may be zero but the corresponding path. The object starts its journey from QO — distance covered is not zero. If we consider the which is treated as its reference point — object to travel back to QO, the final position (Fig. 7.1). Let A. Band C represent the position — concides with the initial position, and therefore, of the object at different instants. At first, the the displacement is zero. However, the distance object moves through C and Band reaches A. covered in this journey is OA + AO = 60 km + Then it moves back along the same pathand =60km = 120 km. Thus, two different physical reaches C through B. quantities—the distance and the displacement, oO Cc B A 0 5 10 18 20 28 300035 40 45 50 55 60 km Fig. 7.1: Positions of an object ona straight line path The total path length covered by the object. are used to describe the overall motion of an is OA + AC, that is GO km + 35km=95km. object and to locate its final position with This is the distance covered by the object. To reference to its initial position ata given time. describe distance we need to specify only the a numerical value and not the direction of Activity —— 7.3 motion. There are certain quantities which * Take a metre seale and a long rope. are described by specifying only their ¢ Walk from one corner of a basket-ball numerical values. The numerical value of a court to its oppposite corner along its physical quantity is its magnitude. From this sides. example, can you find out the distance of the ¢ Measure the distance covered by you final position C of the object from the initial and magnitude of the displacement, position ©? This difference will give you the . What difference would you notice numerical value of the displacement of the between the two in this case? object from O to C through A. The shortest Mboaat. distance measured from the initial to the final Activity TTT 0.4 position of an object is known as ¢ = Automobiles are fitted with a device the displacement. that shows the distance travelled. Such Can the magnitude of the displacement be a device is known as an odometer. A equal to the distance travelled by an object? car is driven from Bhubaneshwar to Consider the example given in (Fig. 7.1). For New Delhi, The difference between the . - final reading and the initial reading of mouon of the object from O to A, the distance the odometer is 1850 km. covered is 60 km and the magnitude of ¢ Find the magnitude of the displacement displacement is also GO km. During its motion between Bhubaneshwar and New Delhi from O to Aand back to B, the distance covered by using the Road Map of India. Monox 73 Reprint 2025-26 :