MOTION 77 7777 7777 To answer such a question, we have to introduce another physical quantity called acceleration, which is a measure of the change in the velocity of an object per unit time. That is, acceleration = change in velocity time taken If the velocity of an object changes from an initial value u to the final value v in time t, the acceleration a is, v – u a = t (7.3) This kind of motion is known as accelerated motion. The acceleration is taken to be positive if it is in the direction of velocity and negative when it is opposite to the direction of velocity . The SI unit of acceleration is m s–2 . If an object travels in a straight line and its velocity increases or decreases by equal amounts in equal intervals of time, then the acceleration of the object is said to be uniform. The motion of a freely falling body is an example of uniformly accelerated motion. On the other hand, an object can travel with non-uniform acceleration if its velocity changes at a non-uniform rate. For example, if a car travelling along a straight road increases its speed by unequal amounts in equal intervals of time, then the car is said to be moving with non-uniform acceleration. Activity ActivityActivity ActivityActivity 7.8 7.87.8 7.87.8 • In your everyday life you come across a range of motions in which (a) acceleration is in the direction of motion, (b) acceleration is against the direction of motion, (c) acceleration is uniform, (d) acceleration is non-uniform. • Can you identify one example each for the above type of motion? Exampl ExamplExampl ExamplExampleee ee 7.4 Starting from a stationary position, Rahul paddles his bicycle to attain a velocity of 6 m s–1 in 30 s. Then he applies brakes such that the velocity of the bicycle comes down to 4 m s-1 in the next 5 s. Calculate the acceleration of the bicycle in both the cases. Solution:Solution:Solution:Solution:Solution: In the first case: initial velocity, u = 0 ; final velocity, v = 6 m s–1 ; time, t = 30 s . From Eq. (8.3), we have v – u a = t Substituting the given values of u,v and t in the above equation, we get ( ) –1 –1 6m s – 0m s = 30 s a = 0.2 m s–2 In the second case: initial velocity, u = 6 m s–1; final velocity, v = 4 m s–1; time, t = 5 s. Then, ( ) –1 –1 4m s – 6m s = 5 s a = –0.4 m s–2 . The acceleration of the bicycle in the first case is 0.2 m s–2 and in the second case, it is –0.4 m s–2. uestions 1. When will you say a body is in (i) uniform acceleration? (ii) non- uniform acceleration? 2. A bus decreases its speed from 80 km h–1 to 60 km h–1 in 5 s . Find the acceleration of the bus. 3. A train starting fr om a railway station and moving with uniform acceleration attains a speed 40 km h –1 in 10 minutes. Find its acceleration. Q Reprint 2025-26
To answer such a question, we have to attain a velocity of 6 ms7'in 30s. Then introduce another physical quantity called he applies brakes such that the velocity acceleration, which is a measure of the of the bicycle comes down to 4m s‘lin change in the velocity of an object per unit the next 5s. Calculate the acceleration time. That is, of the bicycle in both the cases. change in velocity Solution: acceleration = . time taken In the first case: If the velocity of an object changes from initial velocity, 1 = 0; ' an initial value uv to the final value vin time fal veo ve6ms": . ime, /=30s. f, the acceleration 2 is, a From Eq. (8.3), we have Do as vO ou ; (7.3) as t This kind of motion is known as . carers Dyer. eos cacceupsD panes tipans de daale Substituting the given values of u.vand accelerated motion. The acceleration is taken /in the above equati Je wet to be positive ifit is in the direction of velocity Ty Mite above equallonr. We £e and negative when it is opposite to the (6ms' Oms ') direction of velocity. The SI unit of as . acceleration is ms”. 30s If an object travels in a straight line and =02ms? its velocity increases or decreases by equal 7 > . . : In the second case: amounts in equal intervals of time, then the . ile . - . initial velocity, a= 6 ms-!: acceleration of the object is said to be . aa ale . . . final velocity, v =4 ms": uniform. The motion of a freely falling body . ne . - ” “ tine, /=5 s. is an example of uniformly accelerated motion. On the other hand, an object can (4 ms! 6ms ‘') travel with non-uniform acceleration if its Then, a = me velocity changes at a non-uniform rate. For os example, ifa car travelling along a straight =-0.4ms". road increases its speed by unequal amounts The acceleration of the bicycle in the in equal intervals of time. the nthe car is said first case is 0.2 ms? and in the second to be moving with non-uniform acceleration. case, it is -0.4 ms”. Activity___ 7.8 ¢ — Inyour everyday life you come across (" westions a range of motions in which { | n.. cap ce a tae {a) acceleration is in the direction of 1 When will vou sav a body is in motion, OG) unitormaceeleration? (fi) non- (b) acceleration is against the uniforin acecleravion? direction of motion, | 2. A bus decreases its speed trom (c) acceleration is uniform, UJ SOkmuh- to 6Okm hh! in 5s. (d)_ acceleration is non-uniform. Find the acceleration of the bus, . Can you identify one example each OA twain starting trom ai railway for the above type of motion? squiion and moving with uniform aecceleravion attains a speed Example 7.4 Starting from a stationary 40 km h- in 10 minutes, Pind position, Rahul paddles his bicycle to its acecleration, Monox 77 Reprint 2025-26