MOTION 83 4. A racing car has a unifor m acceleration of 4 m s -2. What distance will it cover in 10 s after start? 5. A stone is thrown in a vertically upward direction with a velocity of 5 m s -1. If the acceleration of the stone during its motion is 10 m s–2 in the downward direction, what will be the height attained by the stone and how much time will it take to reach there? 7.6 Uniform Circular Motion When the velocity of an object changes, we say that the object is accelerating. The change in the velocity could be due to change in its magnitude or the direction of the motion or both. Can you think of an example when an object does not change its magnitude of velocity but only its direction of motion? straight parts AB, BC, CD and DA of the track. In order to keep himself on track, he quickly changes his speed at the corners. How many times will the athlete have to change his direction of motion, while he completes one round? It is clear that to move in a rectangular track once, he has to change his direction of motion four times. Now, suppose instead of a rectangular track, the athlete is running along a hexagonal shaped path ABCDEF , as shown in Fig. 7.8(b). In this situation, the athlete will have to change his direction six times while he completes one round. What if the track was not a hexagon but a regular octagon, with eight equal sides as shown by ABCDEFGH in Fig. 7.8(c)? It is observed that as the number of sides of the track increases the athelete has to take turns more and more often. What would happen to the shape of the track as we go on increasing the number of sides indefinitely? If you do this you will notice that the shape of the track approaches the shape of a circle and the length of each of the sides will decrease to a point. If the athlete moves with a velocity of constant magnitude along the circular path, the only change in his velocity is due to the change in the direction of motion. The motion of the athlete moving along a circular path is, therefore, an example of an accelerated motion. We know that the circumference of a circle of radius r is given by π2 r . If the athlete takes t seconds to go once around the circular path of radius r , the speed v is given by π2 rv = t (7.8) When an object moves in a circular path with uniform speed, its motion is called uniform circular motion. (a) Rectangular track (b) Hexagonal track (d) A circular track(c) Octagonal shaped track Fig. 7.8: The motion of an athlete along closed tracks of different shapes. Let us consider an example of the motion of a body along a closed path. Fig 8.9 (a) shows the path of an athlete along a rectangular track ABCD. Let us assume that the athlete runs at a uniform speed on the Reprint 2025-26
qd. A racing car has a uniform straight parts AB, BC, CD and DA of the track. acceleration of dim s*. What In order to keep himself on track, he quickly distance teil it cover int 10s after changes his speed at the corners. How many _ Start? ; ; times will the athlete have to change his 5, A stone is throw int ce verticcdly . . . . upteard direction with a velocity direction of motion, while he completes one of 5m s:. If the acceleration of round? It is clear that to move in a rectangular the stone during its motion is 10 track once, he has to change his direction of ms< inthe dawniwared direction, motion four times. iwhar till be the height attained Now, suppose instead of a rectangular by the stone and Row much time track, the athlete is running along a weill it take to reach there? hexagonal shaped path ABCDEF, as shown in Fig. 7.8(b). In this situation, the athlete will 7.6 Uniform Circular Motion have to change his direction six times while he completes one round. What if the track When the velocity ofan object changes. we say was not a hexagon but a regular octagon, that the object is accelerating. The change in with eight equal sides as shown by the velocity could be due to change in its ABeDEFGH in Fig. 7.8(¢)? It is observed that magnitude or the direction of the motion or | af ctctanes . sears ceseee both. Can you think of an example when an asthe number of sides of the track increases object does not change its magnitude of the athelete has to take turns more and more velocity but only its direction of motion? often. What would happen to the shape of the n E track as we go on increasing the number of > > r sides indefinitely? If you do this you will notice that the shape of the track approaches the shape of a circle and the length of each of c A the sides will decrease to a point. If the athlete © » B moves with a velocity of constant magnitude fa} Rectangular track (b} Hexagonal track along the circular path, the only change in G his velocity is due to the change in the F 4 direction of motion. The motion of the athlete moving along a circular path is, therefore, an E A example of an accelerated motion. We know that the circumference of a circle a ‘i of radius ris given by 2zr. Ifthe athlete takes C t seconds to go once around the circular path fe} Octagonal shaped tack — (d) A circular (rack of radius rf the speed tis given by Fig. 7.8: The motion of an athlete along closed tracks _ 2ar of different shapes. pe 7 Let us consider an example of the motion (7.8) of a body along a closed path. Fig 8.9 (a) , shows the path of an athlete along a When an object moves in a circular path rectangular track ABCT). Let us assume that with uniform speed, its motion is called the athlete runs at a uniform speed on the — uniform circular motion. Motiox 83 Reprint 2025-26 :