SCIENCE80 In this case, the velocity-time graph for the motion of the car is shown in Fig. 7.6. The nature of the graph shows that velocity changes by equal amounts in equal intervals of time. Thus, for all unifor mly accelerated motion, the velocity-time graph is a straight line. Fig. 7.6: Velocity-time graph for a car moving with uniform accelerations. You can also deter mine the distance moved by the car from its velocity-time graph. The ar ea under the velocity-time graph gives the distance (magnitude of displacement) moved by the car in a given interval of time. If the car would have been moving with uniform velocity, the distance travelled by it would be r epresented by the ar ea ABCD under the graph (Fig. 7.6). Since the magnitude of the velocity of the car is changing due to acceleration, the distance s travelled by the car will be given by the area ABCDE under the velocity-time graph (Fig. 7.6). That is, s = area ABCDE = area of the rectangle ABCD + area of the triangle ADE = AB × BC + 1 2 (AD × DE) In the case of non-uniformly accelerated motion, velocity-time graphs can have any shape. Fig. 7.7: Velocity-time graphs of an object in non- uniformly accelerated motion. Fig. 7.7(a) shows a velocity-time graph that represents the motion of an object whose velocity is decr easing with time while Fig. 7.7 (b) shows the velocity-time graph representing the non-unifor m variation of velocity of the object with time. Try to interpret these graphs. Activity ActivityActivity ActivityActivity 7.9 7.97.9 7.97.9 • The times of arrival and departure of a train at three stations A, B and C and the distance of stations B and C from station A are given in Table 7.4. Table 7.4: Distances of stations B and C from A and times of arrival and departure of the train Station Distance Time of Time of from A arrival departure (km) (hours) (hours) A 0 08:00 08:15 B 120 11:15 11:30 C 180 13:00 13:15 • Plot and interpret the distance-time graph for the train assuming that its motion between any two stations is uniform. Velocity (km h –1 )