[Page 1]
SCIENCE100 We have learnt about the motion of objects and force as the cause of motion. We have learnt that a force is needed to change the speed or the direction of motion of an object. We always observe that an object dropped from a height falls towards the earth. We know that all the planets go around the Sun. The moon goes around the earth. In all these cases, there must be some force acting on the objects, the planets and on the moon. Isaac Newton could grasp that the same force is responsible for all these. This force is called the gravitational force. In this chapter we shall learn about gravitation and the universal law of gravitation. We shall discuss the motion of objects under the influence of gravitational force on the earth. W e shall study how the weight of a body varies fr om place to place. We shall also discuss the conditions for objects to float in liquids. 9.1 Gravitation We know that the moon goes around the earth. An object when thrown upwards, reaches a certain height and then falls downwards. It is said that when Newton was sitting under a tree, an apple fell on him. The fall of the apple made Newton start thinking. He thought that: if the earth can attract an apple, can it not attract the moon? Is the force the same in both cases? He conjectured that the same type of force is responsible in both the cases. He argued that at each point of its orbit, the moon falls towards the earth, instead of going off in a straight line. So, it must be attracted by the earth. But we do not really see the moon falling towards the earth. Let us try to understand the motion of the moon by recalling activity 7.11. Activity ______________ 9.1 • Take a piece of thread. • Tie a small stone at one end. Hold the other end of the thread and whirl it round, as shown in Fig. 9.1. • Note the motion of the stone. • Release the thread. • Again, note the direction of motion of the stone. Fig. 9.1: A stone describing a circular path with a velocity of constant magnitude. Before the thread is released, the stone moves in a circular path with a certain speed and changes direction at every point. The change in direction involves change in velocity or acceleration. The force that causes this acceleration and keeps the body moving along the circular path is acting towards the centre. This force is called the centripetal (meaning ‘centre-seeking’) force. 9 GGG GGRAVITATIONRAVITATIONRAVITATIONRAVITATIONRAVITATION C hapter Reprint 2025-26
J ee C hapter 9 5. wresunc GRAVITATION Let us try to understand the motion of the We have learnt about the motion of objects and moon by recalling activity 7.11. force as the cause of motion. We have learnt that a force is needed to change the speed or Activity 9.1 the direction of motion of an object. We always . ; . observe that an object dropped from a height * Take a piece of thread. falls towards the earth. We know that all the ° Tie a small stone at one end. Hold the q 4 other end of the thread and whirl it planets go around the Sun. The moon goes round, as shown in Fig, 9.1. around the earth. In all these cases, there must ° Note the motion of the stone. be some force acting on the objects, the planets © — Release the thread. and on the moon. Isaac Newton could grasp . Again, note the direction of motion of that the same force is responsible for all these. the stone. This force is called the gravitational force. In this chapter we shall learn about peso rrr tee gravitation and the universal law of a Te . gravitation. We shall discuss the motion of re 7 se) objects under the influence of gravitational ? ~ i force on the earth. We shall study how the ‘ PA “ weight of a body varies from place to place. 4 By / We shall also discuss the conditions for sa y ) oo objects to float in liquids. ~. weet” 9.1 Gravitation We know that the moon goes around the earth. ot An object when thrown upwards, reaches a certain height and then falls downwards. It is said that when Newton was sitting under a tree. Fig. 9.1: Astone describing a circular path with a an apple fell on him. The fall of the apple made velocity of constant magnitude. Newton start thinking. He thought that: if the earth can attract an apple, can it not attract Before the thread is released, the stone the moon? Is the force the same in both cases? moves in a circular path with a certain speed He conjectured that the same type of force is and changes direction at every point. responsible in both the cases. He argued that = The change in direction involves change in at each point of its orbit, the moon falls — velocity or acceleration. The force that causes towards the earth, instead of going off ina this acceleration and keeps the body moving straight line. So, it must be attracted by the — along the circular path is acting towards earth. But we do not really see the moon falling the centre. This force is called the towards the earth. centripetal (meaning ‘centre-seeking’) force. Reprint 2025-26

[Page 2]
GRAVITATION 101 9.1.1 UNIVERSAL LAW OF GRAVITATION Every object in the universe attracts every other object with a force which is proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional to the squar e of the distance between them. The for ce is along the line joining the centres of two objects. In the absence of this force, the stone flies off along a straight line. This straight line will be a tangent to the circular path. More to know Tangent to a circle A straight line that meets the circle at one and only one point is called a tangent to the cir cle. Straight line ABC is a tangent to the cir cle at point B. The motion of the moon around the earth is due to the centripetal force. The centripetal force is provided by the for ce of attraction of the earth. If there wer e no such for ce, the moon would pursue a unifor m straight line motion. It is seen that a falling apple is attracted towards the earth. Does the apple attract the earth? If so, we do not see the earth moving towards an apple. Why? According to the third law of motion, the apple does attract the earth. But accor ding to the second law of motion, for a given force, acceleration is inversely pr oportional to the mass of an object [Eq. (8.4)]. The mass of an apple is negligibly small compared to that of the earth. So, we do not see the earth moving towards the apple. Extend the same argument for why the earth does not move towards the moon. In our solar system, all the planets go around the Sun. By ar guing the same way, we can say that there exists a force between the Sun and the planets. From the above facts Newton concluded that not only does the earth attract an apple and the moon, but all objects in the universe attract each other. This force of attraction between objects is called the gravitational force. G 2 Mm F = d Fig. 9.2: The gravitational force between two uniform objects is directed along the line joining their centres. Let two objects A and B of masses M and m lie at a distance d from each other as shown in Fig. 9.2. Let the force of attraction between two objects be F . According to the universal law of gravitation, the for ce between two objects is directly proportional to the product of their masses. That is, F∝ M × m (9.1) And the force between two objects is inversely proportional to the squar e of the distance between them, that is, ∝ 2 1F d (9.2) Combining Eqs. (10.1) and (10.2), we get F ∝ 2 ×M m d (9.3) or, G 2 M × m F = d (9.4) where G is the constant of proportionality and is called the universal gravitation constant. By multiplying crosswise, Eq. (9.4) gives F × d 2 = G M × m Reprint 2025-26
In the absence of this force, the stone flies off — 9.1.1) UNIVERSAL LAW OF GRAVITATION along a straight line. This straight line will be a tangent to the circular path. Every object in the universe attracts every other object with a force which is proportional Tangent to a circle to the product of their masses and inversely " proportional to the square of the distance A b c between them. The force is along the line joining the centres of two objects. 2 ° S =< A B g s Astraight line that meets the circle at one and only one point is called a F=G6 Mm tangent to the circle. Straight line a ABC is a tangent to the circle at point B. Fig. 9.2: The gravitational force betweer two uniform objects is directed along the line The motion of the moon around the earth Joining their centres, is due to the centripetal force. The centripetal force is provided by the force of attraction of Let two objects A and B of masses Mand the earth. If there were no such force, the mlie ata distance dfrom each other as shown moon would pursue a uniform straight line — in Fig. 9.2. Let the force of attraction between motion. two objects be F. According to the universal It is seen that a falling apple is attracted law of gravitation, the force between two towards the earth. Does the apple attract the objects is directly proportional to the product earth? If so, we do not see the earth moving — of their masses. That is. towards an apple. Why’? Foo M xa 9.1) According to the third law of motion, the and the force between two objects is inversely apple does attract the earth. But according proportional to the square of the distance to the second law of motion, for a given force. between them, that is. acceleration is inversely proportional to the mass of an object (Eq. (8.4)]. The mass of an l apple is negligibly small compared to that of Pe we {9.2) the earth. So. we do not see the earth moving ‘ towards the apple. Extend the same argument Combining Eqs. (10.1) and (10.2), we get for why the earth does not move towards the moon. Mxim In our solar system, all the planets go Fo a? {9.3) around the Sun. By arguing the same way. we can say that there exists a force between ., Mxm the Sun and the planets. From the above facts OF. PEG r {9.4) Newton concluded that not only does the ‘ earth attract an apple and the moon, but all where Gis the constant of proportionality and objects in the universe attract each other. This is called the universal gravitation constant. force of attraction between objects is called By multiplying crosswise, Eq. (9.4) gives the gravitational force. Fxd?=GMxim GRAVITATION 101 Reprint 2025-26 :

[Page 3]
SCIENCE102 102102 102102 From Eq. (9.4), the force exerted by the earth on the moon is G 2 M × mF = d 11 2 -2 24 22 8 2 6.7 10 N m kg 6 10 kg 7.4 10 kg (3.84 10 m) − × × × × ×= × = 2.02 ´ 1020 N. Thus, the force exerted by the earth on the moon is 2.02 ´ 1020 N. uestions 1. State the universal law of gravitation. 2. Write the formula to find the magnitude of the gravitational force between the earth and an object on the surface of the earth. 9.1.2 IMPORTANCE OF THE UNIVERSAL LAW OF GRAVITATION The universal law of gravitation successfully explained several phenomena which were believed to be unconnected: (i) the force that binds us to the earth; (ii) the motion of the mo on around the earth; (iii) the motion of planets around the Sun; and (iv) the tides due to the moon and the Sun. 9.2 Free Fall Let us try to understand the meaning of free fall by performing this activity. Activity 9.2 · Take a stone. · Throw it upwards. · It reaches a certain height and then it starts falling down. We have learnt that the earth attracts objects towards it. This is due to the gravitational force. Whenever objects fall towards the earth under this force alone, we say that the objects are in free fall. Is there any or 2 G = × F d M m (9.5) The SI unit of G can be obtained by substituting the units of force, distance and mass in Eq. (9.5) as N m2 kg–2. The value of G was found out by Henry Cavendish (1731 – 1810) by using a sensitive balance. The accepted value of G is 6.673 ´ 10–11 N m2 kg–2. We know that there exists a force of attraction between any two objects. Compute the value of this force between you and your friend sitting closeby. Conclude how you do not experience this force! The law is universal in the sense that it is applicable to all bodies, whether the bodies are big or small, whether they are celestial or terrestrial. I IIIInverse-squarenverse-squarenverse-squarenverse-squarenverse-square Saying that F is inversely proportional to the square of d means, for example, that if d gets bigger by a factor of 6, F becomes 1 36 times smaller. Exampl ExamplExampl ExamplExampl eee ee 9.1 9.19.1 9.19.1 The mass of the earth is 6 ´ 10 24 kg and that of the moon is 7.4 × 1022 kg. If the distance between the earth and the moon is 3.84×10 5 km, calculate the force exerted by the earth on the moon. (Take G = 6.7 × 10–11 N m2 kg-2) Solution SolutionSolution SolutionSolution: :: :: The mass of the earth, M = 6 × 1024 kg The mass of the moon, m = 7.4 × 1022 kg The distance between the earth and the moon, d = 3.84 × 105 km = 3.84 × 105 × 1000 m = 3.84 × 108 m G = 6.7 × 10–11 N m2 kg–2 More to know Q Reprint 2025-26
Fa From Eq. (9.4), the force exerted by the or Ge (9.5) earth on the moon is Mxm ~_, Mxm The SI unit of G can be obtained by F=G d? substituting the units of force, distance and mass in Eq. (9.5) as Nm? kg. 6.7x10 0 Nam’ kg? x 6x10" ke x7.4 x10 ke The value of G was found out by ~ (3.84x«10° m)’ Henry Cavendish (1731 - 1810) by using a ° sensitive balance. The accepted value of Gis = 2.02 « 10®N. 6.673 x 10°! Nin? kg’. Thus, the force exerted by the earth on We know that there exists a force of the moon is 2.02 x 10? N. attraction between any two objects. Compute FON the value of this force between you and your sti : friend sitting closeby. Conclude how you do N) HeStiaits not experience this force! | 1. State the universal law of | gravitation, The law is universal in the sense that 2. Write the formula fo find the | magnitude of the gravitational it is applicable to all bodies, whether UJ force between the earth and an > the bodies are big or stnall, whether object oni the surface of the earth, 5 they are celestial or terrestrial. . c wa Inverse-square 9.1.2 IMPORTANCE OF THE UNIVERSAL fo} : mG LAW OF GRAVITATION we Saying that F is inversely Ra proportional to the square of d The universal law of gravitation successfully @ means, for example, that if d gets explained several phenomena which were = bigger by a factor of 6, F becomes believed to be unconnected: } (i) the force that binds us to the earth: 3p Himes smaller. (ii) the motion of the moon around the . earth: (ii) the motion of planets around the Sun; SS and Example 9.1 The mass of the carth is (iv) the tides due to the moon and the Sun. 6 x 10” kg and that of the moon is 74x10” kg. Ifthe distance between the 9.2 Free Fall earth and the moon is 3.84x10° km, calculate the force exerted by the earth on Let us try to understand the meaning of free the moon, (Take G = 6.7 x 10° Nn? kg) fall by performing this activity: Solution: Activity 92 The mass of the earth, M= 6 x 10% kg . Take a stone. The mass of the moon, ¢ Throw it upwards. m=7.4x 10% kg . Tt reaches a certain height and then it The distance between the earth and the starts falling down. Toon, We have learnt that the earth attracts d= 3.84 x 10°km objects towards it. This is due to the = 3.84 x 10°x 1000 m gravitational force. Whenever objects fall = 3.84 x 10°m towards the earth under this force alone, we Ge 6.7 x 10" Nm? kg? say that the objects are in free fall. Is there any 102 SCENE : Reprint 2025-26

[Page 4]
GRAVITATION 103 103103 103103 calculations, we can take g to be more or less constant on or near the earth. But for objects far from the earth, the acceleration due to gravitational for ce of earth is given by Eq. (9.7). 9.2.1 TO CALCULATE THE VALUE OF g To calculate the value of g, we should put the values of G, M and R in Eq. (9.9), namely, universal gravitational constant, G = 6.7 × 10–11 N m2 kg-2, mass of the earth, M = 6 × 1024 kg, and radius of the earth, R = 6.4 × 106 m. G 2 M g = R -11 2 -2 24 6 2 6.7 10 N m kg 6 10 kg= (6.4 10 m) × × × × = 9.8 m s–2. Thus, the value of acceleration due to gravity of the earth, g = 9.8 m s–2. 9.2.2 MOTION OF OBJECTS UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF GRAVITATIONAL FORCE OF THE EARTH Let us do an activity to understand whether all objects hollow or solid, big or small, will fall from a height at the same rate. Activity 9.3 • Take a sheet of paper and a stone. Drop them simultaneously from the first floor of a building. Observe whether both of them reach the ground simultaneously. • We see that paper reaches the ground little later than the stone. This happens because of air resistance. The air offers resistance due to friction to the motion of the falling objects. The r esistance offered by air to the paper is more than the resistance offered to the stone. If we do the experiment in a glass jar from which air has been sucked out, the paper and the stone would fall at the same rate. change in the velocity of falling objects? While falling, there is no change in the direction of motion of the objects. But due to the earth’s attraction, there will be a change in the magnitude of the velocity. Any change in velocity involves acceleration. Whenever an object falls towards the earth, an acceleration is involved. This acceleration is due to the earth’s gravitational for ce. Ther efore, this acceleration is called the acceleration due to the gravitational for ce of the earth (or acceleration due to gravity). It is denoted by g. The unit of g is the same as that of acceleration, that is, m s–2. We know from the second law of motion that for ce is the pr oduct of mass and acceleration. Let the mass of the stone in activity 9.2 be m. We already know that there is acceleration involved in falling objects due to the gravitational force and is denoted by g. Therefore the magnitude of the gravitational force F will be equal to the pr oduct of mass and acceleration due to the gravitational force, that is, F = m g (9.6) From Eqs. (9.4) and (9.6) we have 2= G ×M m m g d or G 2 M g = d (9.7) where M is the mass of the earth, and d is the distance between the object and the earth. Let an object be on or near the surface of the earth. The distance d in Eq. (9.7) will be equal to R, the radius of the earth. Thus, for objects on or near the surface of the earth, G 2 M × m mg = R (9.8) G 2 M g = R (9.9) The earth is not a perfect sphere. As the radius of the earth increases from the poles to the equator, the value of g becomes greater at the poles than at the equator . For most Reprint 2025-26
change in the velocity of falling objects? While calculations, we can take gto be more or less falling, there is no change in the direction of — constant on or near the earth. But for objects motion of the objects. But due to the earth’s — far from the earth, the acceleration due to attraction, there will be a change in the — gravitational force of earth is given by magnitude of the velocity. Any change in Eq. (9.7). velocity involves acceleration. Whenever an object falls towards the earth, an acceleration — 9.2.1. To CALCULATE THE VALUE OF g is involved. This acceleration is due to the . earth’s gravitational force. Therefore, this To calculate the value of g. we should put the acceleration is called the acceleration due to — Values of G, Mand R in Eq. (9.9), namely, the gravitational force of the earth (or universal gravitational constant, G =6.7 x10"! acceleration due to gravity). It is denoted by — Nim’ kg’, mass of the earth, M= 6 « 107 kg, g. The unit of g is the same as that of | and radius of the earth, R= 6.4 « 10° m. acceleration, that is, ms. M We know from the second law of motion g2G i, that foree is the product of mass and R acceleration. Let the mass of the stone in . Wane ta et gs 24 activity 9.2 be m. We already know that there = BF x1 Nun kg” 26x10" kg is acceleration involved in falling objects due (6.4 «10° my’ to the gravitational force and is denoted by g. =9.8ms?. Therefore the magnitude of the gravitational . force F will be equal to the product of mass Thus, the value of acceleration due to gravity and acceleration due to the gravitational of the earth, g= 9.8m s”. force, that is, Femg (9.6) 9.2.2, MOTION OF OBJECTS UNDER THE From Eqs. (9.4) and (9.6) we have INFLUENCE OF GRAVITATIONAL Mxm FORCE OF THE EARTH mgeG 2 d Let us do an activity to understand whether all objects hollow or solid, big or small, will or G=G . (9.7) fall from a height at the same rate. C where Mis the mass of the earth, and dts the Activity 3 distance between the object and the earth. ¢ Take a sheet of paper and a stone. Let an object be on or near the surface of Drop them simultaneously from the the earth. The distance d in Eq. (9.7) will be first floor of a building. Observe equal to R, the radius of the earth. Thus, for whether both of them reach the objects on or near the surface of the earth, ground simultaneously. Mxm . We see that paper reaches the ground mg =G ; (9.8) little later than the stone. This happens Re hecause of air resistance. The air offers resistance duc to friction to the motion g=G M (9.9) of the falling objects. The resistance ~ Rr’ “ offered by air to the paper is more than the resistance offered to the stone. If The earth is not a perfect sphere. As the we do the experiment in a glass jar radius of the earth increases from the poles to from which air has been sucked out, the equator, the value of ghecomes greater at the paper and the stone would fall at the poles than at the equator. For most the same rate. GRAVITANON 103 Reprint 2025-26 :

[Page 5]
SCIENCE104 We know that an object experiences acceleration during free fall. From Eq. (9.9), this acceleration experienced by an object is independent of its mass. This means that all objects hollow or solid, big or small, should fall at the same rate. According to a story, Galileo dropped different objects from the top of the Leaning Tower of Pisa in Italy to prove the same. As g is constant near the earth, all the equations for the unifor mly accelerated motion of objects become valid with acceleration a replaced by g. The equations are: v = u + at (9.10) s = ut + 1 2 at2 (9.11) v2 = u2 + 2as (9.12) where u and v are the initial and final velocities and s is the distance covered in time, t. In applying these equations, we will take acceleration, a to be positive when it is in the direction of the velocity, that is, in the direction of motion. The acceleration, a will be taken as negative when it opposes the motion. Example 9.2 A car falls off a ledge and drops to the ground in 0.5 s. Let g = 10 m s –2 (for simplifying the calculations). (i) What is its speed on striking the ground? (ii) What is its average speed during the 0.5 s? (iii) How high is the ledge fr om the ground? Solution: Time, t = ½ second Initial velocity, u = 0 m s–1 Acceleration due to gravity, g = 10 m s–2 Acceleration of the car, a = + 10 m s–2 (downward) (i) speed v = a t v = 10 m s–2 × 0.5 s = 5 m s–1 (ii) average speed= 2 u + v = (0 m s–1+ 5 m s–1)/2 = 2.5 m s–1 (iii) distance travelled, s = ½ a t2 = ½ × 10 m s–2 × (0.5 s)2 = ½ × 10 m s–2 × 0.25 s2 = 1.25 m Thus, (i) its speed on striking the gr ound = 5 m s–1 (ii) its average speed during the 0.5 s = 2.5 m s–1 (iii) height of the ledge from the ground = 1.25 m. Example 9.3 An object is thrown vertically upwards and rises to a height of 10 m. Calculate (i) the velocity with which the object was thrown upwards and (ii) the time taken by the object to reach the highest point. Solution: Distance travelled, s = 10 m Final velocity, v = 0 m s–1 Acceleration due to gravity, g = 9.8 m s–2 Acceleration of the object, a = –9.8 m s–2 (upward motion) (i) v 2 = u2 + 2a s 0 = u 2 + 2 × (–9.8 m s–2) × 10 m –u 2 = –2 × 9.8 × 10 m2 s–2 u = 196 m s-1 u = 14 m s-1 (ii) v = u + a t 0 = 14 m s–1 – 9.8 m s–2 × t t = 1.43 s. Thus, (i) Initial velocity, u = 14 m s–1, and (ii) Time taken, t = 1.43 s. uestions 1. What do you mean by free fall? 2. What do you mean by acceleration due to gravity? Q Reprint 2025-26
We know that an object experiences _uto acceleration during free fall. From Eq. (9.9). (ii) average speed = 2 this acceleration experienced by an object is = (Oms'+5ms}/2 independent of its mass. This means that all = 25ms! objects hollow or solid, big or small, should (ii) distance travelled, s = 4% at? fall at the same rate. According to a story. = %x1O0ms*x (OSs) Galileo dropped different objects from the top = x 10ms2 x 0.258? of the Leaning Tower of Pisa in Italy to prove = 125m the same. Thus. As g is constant near the earth, all the (i) its speed on striking the ground equations for the uniformly accelerated =Sms! motion of objects become valid with (ii) its average speed during the 0.5 s acceleration a replaced by g. =2.5ms: The equations are: (iii) height of the ledge from the ground veutat (9.10) =125m., s=urt 3 att (9.11) v? =u + 2Qas (9.12) Example 9.3 An object is thrown vertically upwards and rises to a height of 10 m. where wand tare the initial and final velocities Calculate (i) the velocity with which the and sis the distance covered in time, f. object was thrown upwards and (ii) the In applying these equations, we will take lime taken by the object to reach the acceleration, ato be positive when it is in the highest point. , direction of the velocity. that is, in the direction of motion. The acceleration, a will — gelution: be taken as negative when it opposes the motion. Distance travelled, s = 10m Final velocity,» = Om s"! ooo eee Acceleration due to gravity, g = 9.8 ms? Example 9.2 A car falls off a ledge and Acceleration of the object, a= -9.8 m 57 drops to the ground in 0.5 s. Let (upward motion) g = 10 m s* (for simplifying the (i) pb? swe4+2as calculations). O= n242x(9.8ms4x1lOm {i) What is its speed on striking the utes 2x 98x10 ms? ground? _ - (ii) What is its average speed during the WS vI96 NS” 0.5 $s? u=)]4ms- (iii) How high is the ledge from the fi) opsurat , ; ground? O=1Ams! B8ms? xt t= 1A8s. Solution: Thus, {i Initial velocity, u = 14m s"'. and Time, t= 4% second Ui) Time taken. f = 1.43 s. Initial velocity, u=Oms * sSsS— Acceleration due to gravity, g = 10ms? » . Acceleration of the car, a= +10ms? ial Hestions (downward) 1. What do yote mean by free fall? (i) speed pos at 2. Wher do yotumean by acceleration v = 10ms47x0.5s ve atee std . _e ot \ due to qranity? = Ooms a) 104 Scieack : Reprint 2025-26

[Page 6]
GRAVITATION 105 9.3 Mass We have learnt in the previous chapter that the mass of an object is the measure of its inertia . We have also learnt that greater the mass, the greater is the inertia. It remains the same whether the object is on the earth, the moon or even in outer space. Thus, the mass of an object is constant and does not change from place to place. 9.4 Weight We know that the earth attracts every object with a certain force and this force depends on the mass (m) of the object and the acceleration due to the gravity (g). The weight of an object is the force with which it is attracted towards the earth. We know that F = m × a, (9.13) that is, F = m × g. (9.14) The force of attraction of the earth on an object is known as the weight of the object. It is denoted by W. Substituting the same in Eq. (9.14), we have W = m × g (9.15) As the weight of an object is the force with which it is attracted towards the earth, the SI unit of weight is the same as that of force, that is, newton (N). The weight is a force acting vertically downwards; it has both magnitude and direction. We have lear nt that the value of g is constant at a given place. Therefore at a given place, the weight of an object is directly proportional to the mass, say m, of the object, that is, W ∝ m. It is due to this reason that at a given place, we can use the weight of an object as a measure of its mass. The mass of an object remains the same everywhere, that is, on the earth and on any planet whereas its weight depends on its location because g depends on location. 9.4.1 WEIGHT OF AN OBJECT ON THE MOON We have learnt that the weight of an object on the earth is the force with which the earth attracts the object. In the same way, the weight of an object on the moon is the force with which the moon attracts that object. The mass of the moon is less than that of the earth. Due to this the moon exerts lesser force of attraction on objects. Let the mass of an object be m. Let its weight on the moon be Wm. Let the mass of the moon be Mm and its radius be Rm. By applying the universal law of gravitation, the weight of the object on the moon will be 2G ×= m m m M mW R (9.16) Let the weight of the same object on the earth be We. The mass of the earth is M and its radius is R. Table 9.1 Celestial Mass (kg) Radius (m) body Earth 5.98 × 1024 6.37 ××106 Moon 7.36 ××1022 1.74 ××106 From Eqs. (9.9) and (9.15) we have, 2G ×=e M mW R (9.17) Substituting the values from Table 10.1 in Eqs. (9.16) and (9.17), we get ( ) 22 26 7.36 10 kgG 1.74 10 m × ×= × m mW 102.431 10 G × = ×mW m (9.18a) and 111.474 10 G × = ×eW m (9.18b) Dividing Eq. (9.18a) by Eq. (9.18b), we get 10 11 2.431 10 1.474 10 ×= × m e W W or 10.165 6 m e W W = ≈ (9.19) Weight of the object on the moon 1= Weight of the object on theearth 6 Weight of the object on the moon = (1/6) × its weight on the earth. Reprint 2025-26
9.3 Mass attracts the object. In the same way, the weight of an object on the moon is the force with We have learnt in the previous chapter that the © which the moon attracts that object. The mass mass of an object is the measure ofits inertia. of the moon is less than that of the earth. Due We have also learnt that greater the mass, the to this the moon exerts lesser force of attraction greater is the inertia. It remains the same — on objects. . whether the object is on the earth, the moon Let the mass of an object be m. Let its or even in outer space. Thus, the mass ofan Weight on the moon be W,,. Let the mass of object is constant and does not change from the moon be M,, and its radius be R,,. place to place. By applying the universal law of gravitation, the weight of the object on the : moon will be 9.4 Weight gM, XEN W,, = Go, (9.16) We know that the earth attracts every object RY with a certain force and this force depends on Let the weight of the same object on the the mass (77) of the object and the acceleration — earth be W_. The mass of the earth is Mand its due to the gravity (g). The weight of an object’ radius is R. is the force with which it is attracted towards the earth. Table 9.1 We know that a ea Fema. (9.13) Celestial Mass (kg) Radius (m) that is, body Feaix g. (9.14) . . The force of attraction of the earth on an Earth 5.98 x 1074 6.37 x 108 object is known as the weight of the object. It Moon 7.36 x 102? 1.74 x 108 is denoted by W. Substituting the same in Eq. (9.14), we have . . Wein xg (9.15) From Eqs. (9.9) and (9.15) we have, As the weight of an object is the force with Wo=G M xin which it is attracted towards the earth, the SI rn (9.17) unit of weight is the same as that of force, that Substituting the values from Table 10.1 in is, newton (N). The weight is a force acting . Wiis vertically downwards; it has both magnitude Eqs. (9.16) and (9.17), we get and direction. . 7.36 «107? kg x mm We have learnt that the value of g is W,.=G 62 constant ata given place. Therefore at a given (1.74 x10 m) place. the weight of an object is directly W,, =2.431«10"G Xm (9.18a) roportional to the mass, say m, of the object. n that is, W o m. It is due to this reason the at and W, =1.474 x10"'G x m (9.18b) a given place, we can use the weight of an Dividing Eq. (9.18a) by Eq. (9.18b), we get object as a measure of its mass. The mass of , oat 10 object remains the same everywhere, that Wao 2431 x10 is. on the earth and on any planet whereas its Wo 1.474% 10° weight depends on its location because g w 1 depends on location. or wo 0.165 = 6 (9.19) 9.4.1 WEIGHT OF AN OBJECT ON Weight of the object onthe moon _ 1 THE MOON Weight of the object ontheearth = 6 We have learnt that the weight ofan objecton — Weight of the object on the moon the earth is the force with which the earth = (1/6) « its weight on the earth. GRAVITATION 105 Reprint 2025-26 :

[Page 7]
SCIENCE106 Example 9.4 Mass of an object is 10 kg. What is its weight on the earth? Solution: Mass, m = 10 kg Acceleration due to gravity, g = 9.8 m s–2 W = m × g W = 10 kg × 9.8 m s-2 = 98 N Thus, the weight of the object is 98 N. Example 9.5 An object weighs 10 N when measur ed on the surface of the earth. What would be its weight when measured on the surface of the moon? Solution: We know, Weight of object on the moon = (1/6) × its weight on the earth. That is, 10 6 6 e m WW = = N. = 1.67 N. Thus, the weight of object on the surface of the moon would be 1.67 N. uestions 1. What are the differences between the mass of an object and its weight? 2. Why is the weight of an object on the moon 1 6 th its weight on the earth? 9.5 Thrust and Pressure Have you ever wondered why a camel can run in a desert easily? Why an army tank weighing more than a thousand tonne r ests upon a continuous chain? Why a truck or a motorbus has much wider tyres? Why cutting tools have sharp edges? In order to address these questions and understand the phenomena involved, it helps to intr oduce the concepts of the net force in a particular direction (thrust) and the force per unit area (pressure) acting on the object concerned. Let us try to understand the meanings of thrust and pr essur e by considering the following situations: Situation 1: You wish to fix a poster on a bulletin board, as shown in Fig 9.3. To do this task you will have to press drawing pins with your thumb. You apply a force on the surface area of the head of the pin. This force is directed perpendicular to the surface area of the board. This force acts on a smaller area at the tip of the pin. Q Fig. 9.3: To fix a poster, drawing pins are pressed with the thumb perpendicular to the board. Situation 2: You stand on loose sand. Your feet go deep into the sand. Now, lie down on the sand. You will find that your body will not go that deep in the sand. In both cases the force exerted on the sand is the weight of your body. Reprint 2025-26
Example 9.4 Mass of an object is 10 kg of the net force in a particular direction (thrust) ° What is its weight onthe earth? ~ and the force per unit area (pressure) acting oo ° — on the object concerned. Solution: Let us try to understand the meanings of Mass. m= 10 kg thrust and pressure by considering the Acceleration due to gravity, g=9.8ms% following situations: Wem ; Situation 1: You wish to fix a poster on a W=-10kex9.8ms"=98N bulletin board. as shown in Fig 9.3. To do this Thus, the weight of the object is 98 N. task you will have to press drawing pins with ssSsSSSSsopvourthumb. You apply a force on the surface area of the head Of the pin. This force is directed Example 9.5 An object weighs 10 N when perpendicular to the surface area of the board. measured on the surface of the earth. This force acts on a smaller area at the tip of What would be its weight when the pin. measured on the surface of the moon? Solution: We know, Ty . ft) Weight of object on the moon axis ie etl = (1/6) x its weight on the earth. — Waenaie " 3 That is, Ray PY aa Ww, 10 >. 4 - W, =—=—N, ' } r ’ by , 6 6 itt Ais : wd = 1.67N. ~yv~ 2 4 Thus, the weight of object on the ~ 47 A surface of the moon would be 1.67 N. ae BAN (()\ vestions \\ iy ft , . VY OSs 1. Whatare the diflercneces between : \ \ the mass of an object and tts Xv \\ . wereht? \ \ ‘ | | 2 Waris the weight ofan object on ™~ \ ‘ the moon 9.7? igs weight on the * vy 6 a \ N\ earth? =S S 9.5 Thrust and Pressure Fig. 9.3: To fix a poster, drawing pins are pressed Have you ever wondered why a camel can run with the Ghuinh perpendicular to the board. ina desert easily? Why an army tank weighing more than a thousand tonne rests upon a — Situation 2: You stand on loose sand. Your continuous chain? Why a truck ora motorbus feet go deep into the sand. Now, lie down on has much wider tyres? Why cutting tools have — the sand. You will find that your body will not sharp edges? In order to address these — go that deep in the sand. In both cases the questions and understand the phenomena force exerted on the sand is the weight of your involved, it helps to introduce the concepts body. 106 Science. Reprint 2025-26

[Page 8]
GRAVITATION 107 You have lear nt that weight is the for ce acting vertically downwards. Here the force is acting perpendicular to the surface of the sand. The force acting on an object perpendicular to the surface is called thrust. When you stand on loose sand, the force, that is, the weight of your body is acting on an area equal to area of your feet. When you lie down, the same force acts on an area equal to the contact area of your whole body, which is larger than the area of your feet. Thus, the effects of for ces of the same magnitude on different ar eas ar e dif ferent. In the above cases, thrust is the same. But ef fects ar e dif ferent. Ther efor e the ef fect of thrust depends on the area on which it acts. The effect of thrust on sand is larger while standing than while lying. The thrust on unit area is called pr essure. Thus, thrustPressure= area (9.20) Substituting the SI unit of thrust and area in Eq. (9.20), we get the SI unit of pressure as N/ m2 or N m–2. In honour of scientist Blaise Pascal, the SI unit of pressure is called pascal, denoted as Pa. Let us consider a numerical example to understand the ef fects of thrust acting on different ar eas. Example 9.6 A block of wood is kept on a tabletop. The mass of wooden block is 5 kg and its dimensions are 40 cm × 20 cm × 10 cm. Find the pressure exerted by the wooden block on the table top if it is made to lie on the table top with its sides of dimensions (a) 20 cm × 10 cm and (b) 40 cm × 20 cm. Solution: The mass of the wooden block = 5 kg The dimensions = 40 cm × 20 cm × 10 cm Here, the weight of the wooden block applies a thrust on the table top. That is, Thrust = F = m × g = 5 kg × 9.8 m s–2 = 49 N Area of a side = length × breadth = 20 cm × 10 cm = 200 cm2 = 0.02 m2 From Eq. (9.20), Pressure = 2 49N 0.02m = 2450 N m-2. When the block lies on its side of dimensions 40 cm × 20 cm, it exerts the same thrust. Area= length × breadth = 40 cm × 20 cm = 800 cm2 = 0.08 m2 From Eq. (9.20), Pressure = 2 49 N 0.08 m = 612.5 N m–2 The pressure exerted by the side 20 cm × 10 cm is 2450 N m–2 and by the side 40 cm × 20 cm is 612.5 N m–2. Thus, the same force acting on a smaller area exerts a larger pressure, and a smaller pressure on a larger area. This is the reason why a nail has a pointed tip, knives have sharp edges and buildings have wide foundations. 9.5.1 PRESSURE IN FLUIDS All liquids and gases are fluids. A solid exerts pressure on a sur face due to its weight. Similarly, fluids have weight, and they also Fig. 9.4 Reprint 2025-26
You have learnt that weight is the force by the wooden block on the table top if acting vertically downwards. Here the force is it is made to lie on the table top with its acting perpendicular to the surface of the sand. sides of dimensions (a) 20 em x 10 cm The force acting on an object perpendicular to and (b) 40 cm «x 20 cm. the surface is called thrust. When you stand on loose sand, the force. Solution: that Is, the weight of your body is acting on ‘The mass of the wooden block = 5 kg an area equal to area of your feet. When you The . . lie down, the same force acts on an area equal The dimensions to the contact area of your whole body, which = 40 om * 20 em x 10. em is larger than the area of your feet. Thus, the Here, the weight of the wooden block effects of forces of the same magnitude on applies a thrust on the table top. different areas are different. In the above That is, . cases, thrust is the same. But effects are Thrust = F = m oe ; different. Therefore the effect of thrust = 5 ke x 9.8 ms- depends on the area on which it acts. 49 The effect of thrust on sand is larger while Area of a side = length x breadth standing than while lying. The thrust on unit * 20 cm 10 om area is called pressure. Thus, . San = 200 em? = 0.02 m’ From Eq. (9.20), Pressure = thrust {9.20) p 49N areca TeSSUTE = ay Substituting the SI unit of thrust and area in 002m Eq. (9.20). we get the SI unit of pressure as N/ = 2450 Nm’. méorNm?. _ When the block lies on its side of In honour of scientist Blaise Pascal, the dimensions 40 em x 20 cm, it exerts SI unit of pressure is called pascal, denoted the same thrust. as Pa. Area= length x breadth Let us consider a numerical example to = 40 em x 20 em understand the effects of thrust acting on = 800 cm? = 0.08 mn? different areas. From Eq. (9.20), oo 49N Example 9.6 A block of wood is kept on a Pressure = doam? tabletop. The mass of wooden block is 5 . kg and its dimensions are 40 em x 20 = 612.5Nm? em x 10 cm, Find the pressure exerted The pressure exerted by the side 20 cm x 10 ¢m is 2450 N m” and by the side “OZ 40 em x 20 em is 612.5 Nm, Thus, the same force acting on a smaller \ area exerts a larger pressure, and a smaller FS pressure on a larger area. This is the reason g why a nail has a pointed tip, knives have sharp FI edges and buildings have wide foundations. 2 = Ce % 9.5.1 PRESSURE IN FLUIDS 20m 40m All liquids and gases are fluids. A solid exerts fal () pressure on a surface due to its weight. Fig. 9.4 Similarly, fluids have weight, and they also GRAVITATION 107 Reprint 2025-26 :

[Page 9]
SCIENCE108 water on the bottle is greater than its weight. Therefore it rises up when released. To keep the bottle completely immersed, the upward force on the bottle due to water must be balanced. This can be achieved by an externally applied force acting downwards. This for ce must at least be equal to the differ ence between the upward force and the weight of the bottle. The upward force exerted by the water on the bottle is known as upthrust or buoyant force. In fact, all objects experience a force of buoyancy when they are immersed in a fluid. The magnitude of this buoyant force depends on the density of the fluid. 9.5.3 WHY OBJECTS FLOAT OR SINK WHEN PLACED ON THE SURFACE OF WATER? Let us do the following activities to arrive at an answer for the above question. Activity ______________ 9.5 • Take a beaker filled with water . • Take an ir on nail and place it on the surface of the water . • Observe what happens. The nail sinks. The for ce due to the gravitational attraction of the earth on the iron nail pulls it downwar ds. Ther e is an upthrust of water on the nail, which pushes it upwards. But the downwar d force acting on the nail is greater than the upthrust of water on the nail. So it sinks (Fig. 9.5). exert pressure on the base and walls of the container in which they are enclosed. Pressure exerted in any confined mass of fluid is transmitted undiminished in all directions. 9.5.2 BUOYANCY Have you ever had a swim in a pool and felt lighter? Have you ever drawn water fr om a well and felt that the bucket of water is heavier when it is out of the water? Have you ever wondered why a ship made of iron and steel does not sink in sea water, but while the same amount of iron and steel in the form of a sheet would sink? These questions can be answered by taking buoyancy in consideration. Let us understand the meaning of buoyancy by doing an activity. Activity ______________ 9.4 • Take an empty plastic bottle. Close the mouth of the bottle with an airtight stopper . Put it in a bucket filled with water . Y ou see that the bottle floats. • Push the bottle into the water. You feel an upward push. Try to push it further down. You will find it difficult to push deeper and deeper. This indicates that water exerts a force on the bottle in the upward dir ection. The upwar d for ce exerted by the water goes on increasing as the bottle is pushed deeper till it is completely immersed. • Now, r elease the bottle. It bounces back to the surface. • Does the force due to the gravitational attraction of the earth act on this bottle? If so, why doesn’t the bottle stay immersed in water after it is released? How can you immerse the bottle in water? The for ce due to the gravitational attraction of the earth acts on the bottle in the downwar d dir ection. So the bottle is pulled downwards. But the water exerts an upward force on the bottle. Thus, the bottle is pushed upwards. We have learnt that weight of an object is the force due to gravitational attraction of the earth. When the bottle is immersed, the upward force exerted by the Fig. 9.5: An iron nail sinks and a cork floats when placed on the surface of water. Reprint 2025-26
exert pressure on the base and walls of the — water on the bottle is greater than its weight. container in which they are enclosed. Pressure — Therefore it rises up when released. exerted in any confined mass of fluid is To keep the bottle completely immersed, transmitted undiminished in all directions. the upward force on the bottle due to water must be balanced. This can be achieved by 9.5.2 BUOYANCY an externally applied force acting downwards. This force must at least be equal to the Have you ever had a swim in a pool and felt difference between the upward force and the lighter? Have you ever drawn water from a weight of the bottle. well and felt that the bucket of water is heavier The upward force exerted by the water on when it is out of the water? Have you ever the bottle is known as upthrust or buoyant wondered why a ship made of iron and steel force. In fact, all objects experience a force of does not sink in sea water, but while the same buoyancy when they are immersed in a fluid. amount of iron and steel in the form ofa sheet — The magnitude of this buoyant force depends would sink? These questions can be answered on the density of the fluid. by taking buoyancy in consideration. Let us understand the meaning of buoyancy by 9.5.3) WHY OBJECTS FLOAT OR SINK doing an activity, WHEN PLACED ON THE SURFACE OF Activity 9.4 WATER? * ‘Take an empty plastic bottle. Close Let us do the following activities to arrive at the mouth of the bottle with an an answer for the above question. airtight stopper. Put it'in a bucket filled with water. You see that the Activity 9.5 bottle floats. . Push the bottle into the water. You feel . Take a beaker filled with water. an upward push. Try to push it further . Take an iron nail and place it on the down, You will find it difficult to push surface of the water. deeper and deeper. This indicates that « Observe what happens. water exerts a force on the bottle in the upward direction. The upward force The nail sinks. The force due to the exerted by the water goes on increasing gravitational attraction of the earth on the as the bottle is pushed deeper ull it is iron nail pulls it downwards. There is an completely immersed. upthrust of water on the nail, which pushes * Now, release the bottle. It bounces it upwards. But the downward force acting back to the surface. oo on the nail is greater than the upthrust of ° Does the force due to the gravitational water on the nail. So it sinks (Fig. 9.5) attraction of the earth act on this . . ome bottle? Ifso, why doesn't the bottle stay ee eee immersed in water after it is released? Len ~ ~~ 5 How can you immerse the bottle in Kr ee nee water? ‘ The force due to the gravitational @ attraction of the earth acts on the bottle in the downward direction. So the bottle is pulled downwards. But the water exerts an upward force on the bottle. Thus, the bottle is \ / pushed upwards. We have learnt that weight we Lee of an object is the force due to gravitational attraction of the earth. When the bottle is Pig. 9.5: Aniron nail sinks and a cork floats when immersed, the upward force exerted by the : placed on the surface of water. 108 Science. : Reprint 2025-26

[Page 10]
GRAVITATION 109 • Observe what happens to elongation of the string or the r eading on the balance. You will find that the elongation of the string or the reading of the balance decreases as the stone is gradually lowered in the water. However, no further change is observed once the stone gets fully immersed in the water. What do you infer from the decrease in the extension of the string or the reading of the spring balance? We know that the elongation produced in the string or the spring balance is due to the weight of the stone. Since the extension decreases once the stone is lowered in water, it means that some force acts on the stone in upward direction. As a result, the net force on the string decreases and hence the elongation also decr eases. As discussed earlier , this upward force exerted by water is known as the force of buoyancy. What is the magnitude of the buoyant force experienced by a body? Is it the same in all fluids for a given body? Do all bodies in a given fluid experience the same buoyant force? The answer to these questions is contained in Archimedes’ principle, stated as follows: Activity ______________ 9.6 • Take a beaker filled with water . • Take a piece of cork and an iron nail of equal mass. • Place them on the surface of water. • Observe what happens. The cork floats while the nail sinks. This happens because of the dif ference in their densities. The density of a substance is defined as the mass per unit volume. The density of cork is less than the density of water. This means that the upthrust of water on the cork is greater than the weight of the cork. So it floats (Fig. 9.5). The density of an iron nail is more than the density of water . This means that the upthrust of water on the iron nail is less than the weight of the nail. So it sinks. Therefore objects of density less than that of a liquid float on the liquid. The objects of density greater than that of a liquid sink in the liquid. uestions 1. Why is it difficult to hold a school bag having a strap made of a thin and strong string? 2. What do you mean by buoyancy? 3. Why does an object float or sink when placed on the sur face of water? 9.6 Archimedes’ Principle Activity ______________ 9.7 • Take a piece of stone and tie it to one end of a rubber string or a spring balance. • Suspend the stone by holding the balance or the string as shown in Fig. 9.6 (a). • Note the elongation of the string or the reading on the spring balance due to the weight of the stone. • Now, slowly dip the stone in the water in a container as shown in Fig. 9.6 (b). Fig. 9.6: (a) Observe the elongation of the rubber string due to the weight of a piece of stone suspended from it in air. (b) The elongation decr eases as the stone is immersed in water. (a) (b) Q Reprint 2025-26
Activity 9 ; —_ ¢ ‘Take a heaker filled with water. _ \y e Take a piece of cork and an iron nail of equal mass. . Place them on the surface of water. . Observe what happens. YT | | The cork floats while the nail sinks. This B happens because of the difference in their densities. The density of a substance is - defined as the mass per unit volume. The fa) density of cork is less than the density of water. This means that the upthrust of water Z on the cork is greater than the weight of the ty cork, So it floats (Fig. 9.5). wy The density of an iron nail is more than the density of water. This means that the Fig. 9.6: fa} Observe the elongation of the rubber upthrust of water on the iron nail is less than string due fo the weight ofa piece of stone . + suspended froin it in air. (b) The elongation the weight of the nail. So it sinks. decreases as the stone is inminersed Therefore objects of density less than that in water. of a liquid float on the liquid. The objects of density greater than that of a liquid sink in e = QOhserve what happens to clongation the liquid. of the string or the reading on the halance. (" Westin You will find that the elongation of the string \ 1. Whvis it ditlicult to hold a school or the reading of the balance decreases as the | bag having a strap made of a thin stone is gradually lowered in the water. However, and strong string? no further change is observed once the stone 19 What do vou mean by buovancv? gets fully immersed in the water. What do you UJ 3 Why does an object float or sink infer from the decrease in the extension of the when placed on the surtace ot string or the reading of the spring balance? water? We know that the elongation produced in the string or the spring balance is due to the 9.6 Archimedes’ Principle weight of the stone. Since the extension decreases once the stone is lowered in water, Activit 9.7 it means that some force acts on the stone in y —________ 7. upward direction. As a result, the net force on * Take a piece of stone and tie it to one the string decreases and hence the elongation end of a rubber string or a spring also decreases. As discussed earlier, this balance. upward force exerted by water is known as e Suspend the stone by holding the the force of buoyancy. me oe tah the string as shown in What is the magnitude of the buoyant . Note the elongation of the string or force experienced by a body? Is it the same the reading on the spring balance due in all fluids for a given body? Do all bodies to the weight of the stone. in a given fluid experience the same buoyant . Now, slowly dip the stone in the water force? The answer to these questions is in a container as shown in contained in Archimedes’ principle, stated as Fig. 9.6 (b). follows: GRAVITATION 109 Reprint 2025-26 :

[Page 11]
SCIENCE110 What you have learnt • The law of gravitation states that the force of attraction between any two objects is proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them. The law applies to objects anywhere in the universe. Such a law is said to be universal. • Gravitation is a weak force unless large masses are involved. • The force of gravity decreases with altitude. It also varies on the surface of the earth, decreasing from poles to the equator. • The weight of a body is the for ce with which the earth attracts it. • The weight is equal to the pr oduct of mass and acceleration due to gravity. • The weight may vary from place to place but the mass stays constant. When a body is immersed fully or partially in a fluid, it experiences an upward force that is equal to the weight of the fluid displaced by it. Now, can you explain why a further decrease in the elongation of the string was not observed in activity 9.7, as the stone was fully immersed in water? Archimedes was a Greek scientist. He discovered the principle, subsequently named after him, after noticing that the water in a bathtub overflowed when he stepped into it. He ran through the streets shouting “Eureka!”, which means “I have got it”. This knowledge helped him to determine the purity of the gold in the crown made for the king. His work in the field of Geometry and Mechanics made him famous. His understanding of levers, pulleys, wheels- and-axle helped the Greek army in its war with Roman army. Archimedes Q Archimedes’ principle has many applications. It is used in designing ships and submarines. Lactometers, which are used to determine the purity of a sample of milk and hydrometers used for determining density of liquids, are based on this principle. uestions 1. You find your mass to be 42 kg on a weighing machine. Is your mass more or less than 42 kg? 2. You have a bag of cotton and an iron bar, each indicating a mass of 100 kg when measured on a weighing machine. In reality, one is heavier than other . Can you say which one is heavier and why? Reprint 2025-26
When a body is immersed tilly or partially Archimedes’ principle has many ina thiid, it experiences an upward torce that — applications. It is used in designing ships and is equal to the weight of the fluid displaced — submarines. Lactometers, which are used to by it. determine the purity of a sample of milk and Now, can you explain why a further hydrometers used for determining density of decrease in the elongation of the string was liquids, are based on this principle. not observed in activity 9.7, as the stone was fully immersed in water? N) westions Archimedes was a Greek scientist. He h You find vour mass fo he 42 ke discovered the principle, subsequently named ona weighing machine. IS) pur seme after him, after noticing that Mass MOLE OF less than 42 kx: Ps wees the water in a bathtub | | 2. You havea bag ofcotton and an ws overflowed when he stepped U) iron bar. cach indicading a mass a\ EM into it. He ran through the of 100 kg when measurcd on a NS MM streets shouting “Eureka!, weighing machine. fn reality, EE. 3 " & which means “I have got it”. one is heavier than other. Can ee " “ae fd This knowledge helped him to You sav which onc is heavier aca ee detennine the purity of the and why? Archimedes gold in the crown made for the king. His work in the field of Geometry and Mechanics made him famous. His understanding of levers, pulleys. wheels- and-axle helped the Greek army in its war with Roman army. (dS What @ FA. you have SN ats As, 1S Fy On b> = ae learnt — o ° The law of gravitation states that the force of attraction between any two objects is proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them. The law applies to objects anywhere in the universe. Such a law is said to be universal. ° Gravitation is a weak force unless large masses are involved. e The foree of gravity decreases with altitude. It also varies on the surface of the earth, decreasing from poles to the equator. ° The weight of a body is the force with which the earth attracts it. ° The weight is equal to the product of mass and acceleration due to gravity. ° The weight may vary from place to place but the mass stays constant. 110 Sewer, Reprint 2025-26

[Page 12]
GRAVITATION 111 • All objects experience a force of buoyancy when they are immersed in a fluid. • Objects having density less than that of the liquid in which they are immersed, float on the sur face of the liquid. If the density of the object is more than the density of the liquid in which it is immersed then it sinks in the liquid. E xercises 1. How does the force of gravitation between two objects change when the distance between them is reduced to half ? 2. Gravitational force acts on all objects in proportion to their masses. Why then, a heavy object does not fall faster than a light object? 3. What is the magnitude of the gravitational for ce between the earth and a 1 kg object on its surface? (Mass of the earth is 6 × 1024 kg and radius of the earth is 6.4 × 106 m.) 4. The earth and the moon ar e attracted to each other by gravitational force. Does the earth attract the moon with a force that is greater or smaller or the same as the force with which the moon attracts the earth? Why? 5. If the moon attracts the earth, why does the earth not move towards the moon? 6. What happens to the force between two objects, if (i) the mass of one object is doubled? (ii) the distance between the objects is doubled and tripled? (iii) the masses of both objects are doubled? 7. What is the importance of universal law of gravitation? 8. What is the acceleration of free fall? 9. What do we call the gravitational force between the earth and an object? 10. Amit buys few grams of gold at the poles as per the instruction of one of his friends. He hands over the same when he meets him at the equator. Will the friend agree with the weight of gold bought? If not, why? [Hint : The value of g is gr eater at the poles than at the equator.] 11. Why will a sheet of paper fall slower than one that is crumpled into a ball? 12. Gravitational force on the sur face of the moon is only 1 6 as strong as gravitational force on the earth. What is the weight in newtons of a 10 kg object on the moon and on the earth? Reprint 2025-26
° All objects experience a force of buoyancy when they are immersed in a fluid. e Objects having density less than that of the liquid in which they are immersed, float on the surface of the liquid. If the density of the object is more than the density of the liquid in which it is immersed then it sinks in the liquid. Ld i Exercises ro : 1. How does the force of gravitation between two objects change i ' a when the distanee between them is reduced to half ? <S w, 2. Gravitational foree acts on all objects in proportion to their me masses. Why then, a heavy object does not fall faster than a light object? 3. What is the magnitude of the gravitational force between the earth and a | kg object on its surface’? (Mass of the earth is 6 x 107" kg and radius of the earth is 6.4 x 10° m.) 4. The earth and the moon are attracted to cach other by gravitational foree. Does the earth attract the moon with a force that is greater or smaller or the same as the force with which the moon attracts the earth? Why? 5. If the moon attracts the earth, why does the earth not move towards the moon? 6. What happens to the force between two objects. if (i) the mass of one object is doubled? (ii) the distance between the objects is doubled and tripled’? (iii) the masses of both objects are doubled’? 7. What is the importance of universal law of gravitation? 8. What is the acceleration of free fall? 9. What do we call the gravitational force between the earth and an object? 10. Amit buys few grams of gold at the poles as per the instruction of one of his friends. He hands over the same when he meets him at the equator. Will the friend agree with the weight of gold bought? If not, why? [Hint: The value of g is greater at the poles than at the equator.] 11. Why will a sheet of paper fall slower than one that is crumpled into a ball? . . I 12. Gravitational force on the surface of the moon is only 5 38 strong as gravitational force on the earth. What is the weight in newtons of a 10 kg object on the moon and on the earth? Gravrianon i Reprint 2025-26

[Page 13]
SCIENCE112 13. A ball is thrown vertically upwards with a velocity of 49 m/s. Calculate (i) the maximum height to which it rises, (ii) the total time it takes to return to the surface of the earth. 14. A stone is r eleased from the top of a tower of height 19.6 m. Calculate its final velocity just before touching the ground. 15. A stone is thrown vertically upward with an initial velocity of 40 m/s. Taking g = 10 m/s 2, find the maximum height reached by the stone. What is the net displacement and the total distance covered by the stone? 16. Calculate the force of gravitation between the earth and the Sun, given that the mass of the earth = 6 × 1024 kg and of the Sun = 2 × 10 30 kg. The average distance between the two is 1.5 × 1011 m. 17. A stone is allowed to fall from the top of a tower 100 m high and at the same time another stone is projected vertically upwards from the ground with a velocity of 25 m/s. Calculate when and where the two stones will meet. 18. A ball thrown up vertically returns to the thrower after 6 s. Find (a) the velocity with which it was thrown up, (b) the maximum height it reaches, and (c) its position after 4 s. 19. In what direction does the buoyant force on an object immersed in a liquid act? 20. Why does a block of plastic released under water come up to the surface of water? 21. The volume of 50 g of a substance is 20 cm3. If the density of water is 1 g cm –3, will the substance float or sink? 22. The volume of a 500 g sealed packet is 350 cm 3. Will the packet float or sink in water if the density of water is 1 g cm–3? What will be the mass of the water displaced by this packet? Reprint 2025-26
13. A ball is thrown vertically upwards with a velocity of 49 m/s. Caleulate (i) the maximum height to which it rises, (ii) the total time it takes to return to the surface of the earth. 14. Astone is released from the top of a tower of height 19.6 m. Calculate its final velocity just before touching the ground. 15. A stone is thrown vertically upward with an initial velocity of 40 m/s. Taking g = 10 m/s’, find the maximum height reached by the stone. What is the net displacement and the total distance covered by the stone? 16. Calculate the force of gravitation between the earth and the Sun, given that the mass of the earth = 6 x 10" kg and of the Sun = 2 x 10" kg. The average distance between the two is 1.5 x 101 m. 17. Astone is allowed to fall from the top of a tower 100 m high and at the same time another stone is projected vertically upwards from the ground with a velocity of 25 m/s. Calculate when and where the two stones will meet. 18. A ball thrown up vertically returns to the thrower after 6 s. Find (a) the velocity with which it was thrown up, (b) the maximum height it reaches, and (ce) its position after 4 s. 19. In what direction does the buoyant force on an object immersed in a liquid act? 20. Why does a block of plastic released under water come up to the surface of water? 21. The volume of 50 g of a substance is 20 cm’. If the density of water is 1 g em”, will the substance float or sink? 22. The volume of a 500 g sealed packet is 350 em*. Will the packet float or sink in water if the density of water is 1 g env"? What will be the mass of the water displaced by this packet? 112 Sewxer, Reprint 2025-26