[Page 1]
SCIENCE140 We know that all living organisms need food. Food supplies proteins, carbohydrates, fats, vitamins and minerals, all of which we require for body development, gr owth and health. Both plants and animals ar e major sources of food for us. W e obtain most of this food from agriculture and animal husbandry. We r ead in newspapers that ef forts ar e always being made to impr ove pr oduction from agriculture and animal husbandry. Why is this necessary? Why we cannot make do with the current levels of production? India is a very populous country. Our population is mor e than one billion people, and it is still growing. As food for this growing population, we will soon need mor e than a quarter of a billion tonnes of grain every year. This can be done by far ming on more land. But India is already intensively cultivated. As a result, we do not have any major scope for increasing the area of land under cultivation. Therefore, it is necessary to incr ease our production ef ficiency for both cr ops and livestock. Efforts to meet the food demand by incr easing food production have led to some successes so far . We have had the gr een revolution, which contributed to incr eased food-grain production. We have also had the white revolution, which has led to better and more efficient use as well as availability of milk. However, these revolutions mean that our natural resources are getting used more intensively. As a result, there are more chances of causing damage to our natural resources to the point of destroying their balance completely. Therefore, it is important that we should increase food production without degrading our environment and disturbing the balances maintaining it. Hence, there is a need for sustainable practices in agriculture and animal husbandry. Also, simply increasing grain production for storage in warehouses cannot solve the problem of malnutrition and hunger . People should have money to purchase food. Food security depends on both availability of food and access to it. The majority of our population depends on agriculture for their livelihood. Increasing the incomes of people working in agriculture is therefore necessary to combat the pr oblem of hunger . Scientific management practices should be undertaken to obtain high yields from farms. For sustained livelihood, one should undertake mixed farming, intercropping, and integrated farming practices, for example, combine agriculture with livestock/poultry/fisheries/ bee-keeping. The question thus becomes – how do we increase the yields of crops and livestock? 12.1 Improvement in Crop Yields Cereals such as wheat, rice, maize, millets and sorghum provide us carbohydrate for energy requirement. Pulses like gram ( chana), pea (matar), black gram (urad), green gram (moong), pigeon pea (arhar), lentil (masoor), provide us with protein. And oil seeds including soyabean, ground nut, sesame, castor, mustard, linseed and sunflower provide us with necessary fats (Fig. 12.1). Vegetables, spices and fruits pr ovide a range of vitamins and minerals in addition to small amounts of proteins, carbohydrates and fats. In addition to these food crops, fodder crops like berseem, oats or sudan grass are raised as food for the livestock. 12 I II IIMPROVEMENTMPROVEMENTMPROVEMENTMPROVEMENTMPROVEMENT IN ININ ININ F F F F FOOD OODOOD OODOOD R R R R RESOURCESESOURCESESOURCESESOURCESESOURCES C hapter

[Page 2]
IMPROVEMENT IN FOOD RESOURCES 141 the kharif season from the month of June to October, and some of the crops are grown in the winter season, called the rabi season from November to April. Paddy, soyabean, pigeon pea, maize, cotton, gr een gram and black gram are kharif crops, wher eas wheat, gram, peas, mustard, linseed are rabi crops. In India ther e has been a four times increase in the production of food grains from 1952 to 2010 with only 25% increase in the cultivable land area. How has this incr ease in production been achieved? If we think of the practices involved in farming, we can see that we can divide it into thr ee stages. The first is the choice of seeds for planting. The second is the nurturing of the cr op plants. The third is the protection of the growing and harvested crops from loss. Thus, the major groups of activities for improving crop yields can be classified as: • Crop variety improvement • Crop production improvement • Crop protection management. 12.1.1CROP VARIETY IMPROVEMENT This approach depends on finding a crop variety that can give a good yield. Varieties or strains of crops can be selected by breeding for various useful characteristics such as disease r esistance, r esponse to fertilisers, product quality and high yields. One way of incorporating desirable characters into crop varieties is by hybridisation. Hybridisation refers to cr ossing between genetically dissimilar plants. This cr ossing may be intervarietal (between different varieties), interspecific (between two different species of the same genus) or inter generic (between different genera). Another way of impr oving the crop is by introducing a gene that would provide the desir ed characteristic. This results in genetically modified crops. For new varieties of crops to be accepted, it is necessary that the variety produces high yields under different conditions that ar e found in different areas. Farmers would need to be provided with good quality seeds of a particular variety, that is, the seeds should all Fig. 12.1: Different types of crops uestion 1. What do we get fr om cer eals, pulses, fruits and vegetables? Different crops require different climatic conditions, temperature and photoperiods for their growth and completion of their life cycle. Photoperiods are related to the duration of sunlight. Growth of plants and flowering are dependent on sunlight. As we all know, plants manufacture their food in sunlight by the process of photosynthesis. There are some crops, which are grown in rainy season, called Q

[Page 3]
SCIENCE142 be of the same variety and germinate under the same conditions. Cultivation practices and crop yield are related to weather, soil quality and availability of water. Since weather conditions such as dr ought and flood situations ar e unpredictable, varieties that can be grown in diverse climatic conditions ar e useful. Similarly, varieties tolerant to high soil salinity have been developed. Some of the factors for which variety improvement is done are: • Higher yield: T o increase the productivity of the crop per acr e. • Impr oved quality: Quality considerations of crop products vary from crop to cr op. Baking quality is important in wheat, protein quality in pulses, oil quality in oilseeds and preserving quality in fruits and vegetables. • Biotic and abiotic r esistance: Cr ops production can go down due to biotic (diseases, insects and nematodes) and abiotic (dr ought, salinity, water logging, heat, cold and frost) stresses under different situations. V arieties resistant to these stresses can improve crop production. • Change in maturity duration: The shorter the duration of the crop from sowing to harvesting, the mor e economical is the variety. Such short durations allow far mers to gr ow multiple r ounds of cr ops in a year . Short duration also r educes the cost of crop production. Uniform maturity makes the harvesting pr ocess easy and reduces losses during harvesting. • Wider adaptability: Developing varieties for wider adaptability will help in stabilising the crop production under dif fer ent envir onmental conditions. One variety can then be gr own under different climatic conditions in different areas. • Desirable agronomic characteristics: Tallness and pr ofuse branching ar e desirable characters for fodder crops. Dwarfness is desired in cereals, so that less nutrients are consumed by these crops. Thus developing varieties of desired agronomic characters help give higher productivity. uestions 1. How do biotic and abiotic factors affect crop production? 2. What are the desirable agronomic characteristics for crop improvements? 12.1.2CROP PRODUCTION MANAGEMENT In India, as in many other agriculture-based countries, farming ranges from small to very large farms. Different farmers thus have more or less land, money and access to information and technologies. In short, it is the money or financial conditions that allow farmers to take up different farming practices and agricultural technologies. There is a correlation between higher inputs and yields. Thus, the farmer’s purchasing capacity for inputs decides cropping system and production practices. Therefore, production practices can be at different levels. They include ‘no cost’ production, ‘low cost’ production and ‘high cost’ production practices. 12.1.2 (i) NUTRIENT MANAGEMENT Just as we need food for development, growth and well-being, plants also require nutrients for growth. Nutrients are supplied to plants by air , water and soil. Ther e ar e several nutrients which are essential for plants. Air supplies carbon and oxygen, hydrogen comes from water, and soil supplies the other thirteen nutrients to plants. Amongst these, some are required in large quantities and are therefore called macro-nutrients. The other nutrients are used by plants in small quantities and are therefore called micro-nutrients (Table 12.1). Q