[Page 7]
SCIENCE146 Activity _____________ 12.1 • Visit a nearby garden/agricultural field and make a list of the weeds and the flowers/crops found in the area. Also, make a list of insect pests, if any, infesting the flowers/crops. STORAGE OF GRAINS Storage losses in agricultural produce can be very high. Factors responsible for such losses are biotic— insects, rodents, fungi, mites and bacteria, and abiotic— inappropriate moisture and temperatures in the place of storage. These factors cause degradation in quality, loss in weight, poor germinability, discolouration of produce, all leading to poor marketability. These factors can be controlled by proper treatment and by systematic management of warehouses. Preventive and control measures are used before grains are stored for future use. They include strict cleaning of the produce before storage, proper drying of the produce first in sunlight and then in shade, and fumigation using chemicals that can kill pests. uestions 1. Why should preventive measures and biological control methods be preferred for protecting crops? 2. What factors may be responsible for losses of grains during storage? Activity _____________ 12.2 • Collect grains/seeds of cereals, pulses and oil seeds and gather information about the seasons in which they are sown and harvested. 12.2Animal Husbandry Animal husbandry is the scientific management of animal livestock. It includes various aspects such as feeding, breeding and disease contr ol. Animal-based far ming includes cattle, goat, sheep, poultry and fish farming. As the population increases and as living standar ds incr ease, the demand for milk, eggs and meat is also going up. Also, the gr owing awar eness of the need for humane treatment of livestock has br ought in new limitations in livestock farming. Thus, livestock production also needs to be improved. 12.2.1CATTLE FARMING Cattle husbandry is done for two purposes— milk and draught labour for agricultural work such as tilling, irrigation and carting. Indian cattle belong to two dif ferent species, Bos indicus, cows, and Bos bubalis , buf faloes. Milk-pr oducing females ar e called milch animals (dairy animals), while the ones used for farm labour are called draught animals. Milk production depends, to some extent, on the duration of the lactation period, meaning the period of milk production after Q Table 12.2: Nutritional values of animal products Animal Products Fat Protein Sugar Minerals Water Vitamins Milk (Cow) 3.60 4.00 4.50 0.70 87.20 B1, B2, B12, D, E Egg 12.00 13.00 * 1.00 74.00 B2, D Meat 3.60 21.10 * 1.10 74.20 B2, B12 Fish 2.50 19.00 * 1.30 77.20 Niacin, D, A *Present in very small amounts Per cent (%) Nutrients Reprint 2025-26
Table 12.2: Nutritional values of animal products Animal Per cent (%) Nutrients Products Fat Protein Sugar Minerals Water Vitamins Milk (Cow) 3.60 4.00 4.50 0.70 87.20 BI, B2, B12, D, E Egg 12.00 13.00 * 1.00 74.00 B2,D Meat 3.60 21.10 * 1.10 74.20 B2, B12 Fish 2.50 19.00 * 1.30 77.20 Niacin. D. A *Present in very small amounts Activity 12.1 Activity 12.2 ° Visit a nearby garden/agricultural . Collect grains/seeds of cereals, field and make a hst of the weeds and pulses and oil sceds and gather the Nowers/crops found in the area. information about the seasons in Also, make a list of insect pests, if which they are sown and harvested. any, infesting the flowers/crops. 12.2 Animal Husbandr STORAGE OF GRAINS Y Storage losses in agricultural produce can be Animal husbandry is the scientific very high. Factors responsible for such losses management of animal livestock. It includes are biotic— insects, rodents, fungi. mites and Various aspects such as feeding, breeding and bacteria, and abiotic— inappropriate moisture disease control. Animal-based farming and temperatures in the place of storage. These includes cattle, goat, sheep, poultry and fish factors cause degradation in quality, loss in farming. As the population increases and as weight, poor germinability, discolouration of living standards increase. the demand for produce, all leading to poor marketability. — milk. eggs and meat is also going up. Also, These factors can be controlled by proper the growing awareness of the need for treatment and by systematic management of | humane treatment of livestock has brought warehouses. in new limitations in livestock farming. Thus, Preventive and control measures are used __ livestock production also needs to be improved. before grains are stored for future use. They include strict cleaning of the produce before — 12.2.1 CATTLE FARMING storage, proper drying of the produce first in sunlight and then in shade, and fumigation — Cattle husbandry is done for two purposes— using chemicals that can kill pests. milk and draught labour for agricultural work such as ulling, irrigation and carting. Indian (" uestious cattle belong to two different species, Bos i yi . ; indicus, cows, and Bos bubalis, buffaloes. 1, Why should preventive measures Milk-producing females are called mileh and Diological control micthods be animals (dairy animals), while the ones used preferred tor protccting crops? for farm labour are called draught animals. | | 2 What factors mav be responsible Milk production depends, to some extent, wo) for losses of grains during on the duration of the lactation period, storage? meaning the period of milk production after 146 Sewer, Reprint 2025-26

[Page 8]
IMPROVEMENT IN FOOD RESOURCES 147 the birth of a calf. So, milk production can be increased by increasing the lactation period. Exotic or foreign breeds (for example, Jersey, Brown Swiss) are selected for long lactation periods, while local breeds (for example, Red Sindhi, Sahiwal) show excellent resistance to diseases. The two can be cross-bred to get animals with both the desired qualities. uestion 1. Which method is commonly used for improving cattle breeds and why? Activity _____________ 12.3 • Visit a livestock farm. Note the following: (1) Number of cattle and number of different breeds. (2) The amount of daily milk production from the different breeds. Proper cleaning and shelter facilities for cows and buffaloes are required for humane farming, for the health of the animals and for production of clean milk as well. Animals require regular brushing to remove dirt and loose hair. They should be sheltered under well-ventilated roofed sheds that protect them from rain, heat and cold. The floor of the cattle shed needs to be sloping so as to stay dry and to facilitate cleaning. The food r equirements of dairy animals are of two types: (a) maintenance requirement, which is the food r equired to support the animal to live a healthy life, and (b) milk producing requirement, which is the type of food r equired during the lactation period. Animal feed includes: (a) r oughage, which is largely fibr e, and (b) concentrates, which are low in fibre and contain relatively high levels of pr oteins and other nutrients. Cattle need balanced rations containing all nutrients in proportionate amounts. Besides such nutritious food material, certain feed additives containing micronutrients promote the health and milk output of dairy animals. Cattle suffer from a number of diseases. The diseases, besides causing death, reduce milk pr oduction. A healthy animal feeds regularly and has a nor mal postur e. The parasites of cattle may be both exter nal parasites and internal parasites. The external parasites live on the skin and mainly cause skin diseases. The inter nal parasites like worms, af fect stomach and intestine while flukes damage the liver . Infectious diseases are also caused by bacteria and viruses. Vaccinations ar e given to far m animals against many major viral and bacterial diseases. 12.2.2POULTRY FARMING Poultry farming is undertaken to raise domestic fowl for egg production and chicken meat. Therefore, improved poultry breeds are developed and far med to produce layers for eggs and broilers for meat. The cross-breeding programmes between Indian (indigenous, for example, Aseel) and foreign (exotic, for example, Leghorn) breeds for variety impr ovement ar e focused on to develop new varieties for the following desirable traits— (i) number and quality of chicks; Q Fig. 12.3: Indigenous milch breed of cattle Reprint 2025-26
- Rabeee Bb _ loose hair. They should be sheltered under arr. | well-ventilated roofed sheds that protect them i : tlh i = from rain, heat and cold. The floor of the cattle % ag AT shed needs to be sloping so as to stay dry eae and to facilitate cleaning. te «-" ; a Tog The food requirements of dairy animals = Pe | i iA) tgs “ are of two types: {a) maintenance Cp em egae ip Re yor be | aa "4 requirement, which is the food required to nce cai NOE - support the animal to live a healthy life. and en neces, fa 5 {b) milk producing requirement. which is the ay <a * type of food required during the lactation i ie period. Animal feed includes: (a) roughage, i 4 ': per which is largely fibre, and (b) concentrates, i AY van . which are low in fibre and contain relatively ge & ie ab ar B a high levels of proteins and other nutrients. ee ne 1 Fd na my Cattle need balanced rations containing all . a? ” Bete nutrients in proportionate amounts. Besides such nutritious food material, certain feed Hig. 12.3: Indigenous mileh breed of cattle additives containing micronutrients promote the health and milk output of dairy animals. the birth ofa calf. So, milk production can be Cattle suffer from a number of diseases. increased by increasing the lactation period. — The diseases, besides causing death, reduce Exotic or foreign breeds (for example. Jersey. milk production. A healthy animal feeds Brown Swiss) are selected for long lactation — regularly and has a normal posture. The periods, while local breeds (for example, Red parasites of cattle may be both external Sindhi, Sahiwal) show excellent resistance to parasites and internal parasites. The external diseases. The two can be cross-bred to get parasites live on the skin and mainly cause animals with both the desired qualities. skin diseases. The internal parasites like . worms, affect stomach and intestine while nal vestion flukes damage the liver, Infectious diseases | 1. Which method is conunonly uscd we also caused by bacter fa and viruses. for improving cattle breeds and Vaccinations are given to farm animals | whee against many major viral and bacterial Wy, . diseases. _. 12.2.2 POULTRY FARMING Activity —_______ 12.3 Poultry farming is undertaken to raise e Visit a livestock farm. Note the domestic fowl for egg production and chicken following: meat. Therefore. improved poultry breeds are QQ’) Number of cattle and number of developed and farmed to produce layers for ditterent breeds. ; ; eggs and broilers for meat. (2} The amount of daily milk production The cross-breeding programmes between from the different breeds. - Indian (indigenous, for example, Asee) and Proper cleaning and shelter facilities for foreign (exotic, for example, Leghorn) breeds cows and buffaloes are required for humane for variety improvement are focused on to farming, for the health of the animals and — develop new varieties for the following for production of clean milk as well. Animals — desirable traits— require regular brushing to remove dirt and {i) number and quality of chicks: Inpeoceniat in Foon Reset ices 147 Reprint 2025-26 :