[Page 5]
SCIENCE144 India has a wide variety of water resources and a highly varied climate. Under such conditions, several different kinds of irrigation systems are adopted to supply water to agricultural lands depending on the kinds of water resources available. These include wells, canals, rivers and tanks. • Wells: There are two types of wells, namely dug wells and tube wells. In a dug well, water is collected from water bearing strata. Tube wells can tap water fr om the deeper strata. Fr om these wells, water is lifted by pumps for irrigation. • Canals: This is usually an elaborate and extensive irrigation system. In this system canals receive water fr om one or more reservoirs or from rivers. The main canal is divided into branch canals having further distributaries to irrigate fields. • River Lift Systems : In ar eas where canal flow is insuf ficient or irregular due to inadequate r eservoir r elease, the lift system is more rational. Water is directly drawn fr om the rivers for supplementing irrigation in ar eas close to rivers. • Tanks: These ar e small storage reservoirs, which intercept and store the run-of f of smaller catchment areas. Fresh initiatives for increasing the water available for agricultur e include rainwater harvesting and watershed management. This involves building small check-dams which lead to an incr ease in gr ound water levels. The check-dams stop the rainwater fr om flowing away and also reduce soil erosion. 12.1.2 (iii) CROPPING PATTERNS Different ways of growing crops can be used to give maximum benefit. Mixed cropping is gr owing two or mor e crops simultaneously on the same piece of land, for example, wheat + gram, or wheat + mustard, or gr oundnut + sunflower . This reduces risk and gives some insurance against failure of one of the crops. manure for maintaining soil fertility have to be considered while aiming for optimum yields in crop production. uestion 1. Compare the use of manure and fertilizers in maintaining soil fertility. Organic farming is a farming system with minimal or no use of chemicals as fertilizers, herbicides, pesticides, etc., and with a maximum input of organic manures, recycled farm-wastes (straw and livestock excreta), use of bio-agents such as cultur e of blue green algae in pr eparation of biofertilizers, neem leaves or turmeric specifically in grain storage as bio-pesticides, with healthy cr opping systems [mixed cropping, inter-cropping and crop rotation as discussed below in 12.1.2.(iii)]. These cropping systems are beneficial in insect, pest and wheat control besides providing nutrients. 12.1.2 (ii) IRRIGATION Most agriculture in India is rain-fed, that is, the success of cr ops in most ar eas is dependent on timely monsoons and sufficient rainfall spread through most of the growing season. Hence, poor monsoons cause cr op failure. Ensuring that the crops get water at the right stages during their growing season can increase the expected yields of any crop. Therefore, many measures are used to bring more and more agricultural land under irrigation. Q More to know Droughts occur because of scarcity or irregular distribution of rains. Drought poses a threat to rain-fed farming areas, where farmers do not use irrigation for crop production and depend only on rain. Light soils have less water retention capacity. In areas with light soils, crops get adversely affected by drought conditions. Scientists have developed some crop varieties which can tolerate drought conditions. Reprint 2025-26
manure for maintaining soil fertility have to India has a wide variety of water resources be considered while aiming for optimum yields — and a highly varied climate. Under such in crop production. conditions, several different kinds of irrigation systems are adopted to supply water to westion agricultural lands depending on the kinds of . water resources available. These include wells, fo) Compare dhe use of manure and canals, rivers and tanks. ferdliaers ino maintaining soil e Wells: There are two types of wells. 4 fertility. namely dug wells and tube wells. In a dug well, water is collected from water Organic farming is a farming system with bearing strata. Tube wells can tap minimal or no use of chemicals as fertilizers, water from the deeper strata. From herbicides, pesticides, ete., and with a these wells, water is lifted by pumps maximum input of organic manures, recycled for irrigation. farm-wastes (straw and livestock excreta), use . Canals: This is usually an elaborate of bio-agents such as culture of blue green and extensive irrigation system. In this algae in preparation of biofertilizers, neem system canals receive water from one leaves or turmeric specifically in grain storage or more reservoirs or from rivers. The as bio-pesticides, with healthy cropping main canal is divided into branch systems [mixed cropping, inter -cropping and canals having further distributaries to crop rotation as discussed below in 12.1.2.{iii)]. irrigate fields. These cropping systems are beneficial in e = River Lift Systems: In areas where insect. pest and wheat control besides canal flow is insufficient or irregular providing nutrients. due to inadequate reservoir release, the lift system is more rational. Water 12.1.2 (ii) IRRIGATION is directly drawn from the rivers for Most agriculture in India is rain-fed, that is, supplementing irrigation in areas the success of crops in most areas is close to rivers. dependent on timely monsoons and sufficient ° Tanks: These are small storage rainfall spread through most of the growing reservoirs, which intercept and store season. Hence, poor monsoons cause crop the run-off of smaller catchment failure. Ensuring that the crops get water at areas. the right stages during their growing season Fresh initiatives for increasing the water can increase the expected yields of any crop. available for agriculture include rainwater Therefore, many measures are used to bring — harvesting and watershed management. This more and more agricultural land involves building small check-dams which under irrigation. lead to an increase in ground water levels. - The check-dams stop the rainwater from Droughts occur because of scarcity or flowing away and also reduce soil erosion. irregular distribution of rains. Drought Pag poses a threat to rain-fed farming 12.1.2 (iii) CROPPING PATTERNS eM areas, where farmers do not use & irrigation for crop production and Different ways of growing crops can be used depend only on rain. Light soils have to give maximum benefit. g less water retention capacity. In areas Mixed cropping is growing two or more kag with light soils, crops get adversely crops simultaneously on the same piece of em affected by drought conditions. land, for example, wheat + gram, or wheat + Peg Scientists have developed some crop mustard, or groundnut + sunflower. This varieties which can tolerate drought reduces risk and gives some insurance conditions. against failure of one of the crops. 144 Science. : Reprint 2025-26

[Page 6]
IMPROVEMENT IN FOOD RESOURCES 145 145145145145 Inter-cropping is growing two or more crops simultaneously on the same field in a definite pattern (Fig.12.2). A few rows of one crop alternate with a few rows of a second crop, for example, soyabean + maize, or finger millet (bajra) + cowpea (lobia). The crops are selected such that their nutrient requirements are dif ferent. This ensures maximum utilisation of the nutrients supplied, and also prevents pests and diseases from spreading to all the plants belonging to one crop in a field. This way , both crops can give better returns. ( gokhroo), Parthenium (gajar ghas), Cyperus rotundus ( motha). They compete for food, space and light. Weeds take up nutrients and reduce the growth of the crop. Therefore, removal of weeds from cultivated fields during the early stages of crop growth is essential for a good harvest. Generally insect pests attack the plants in three ways: (i) they cut the root, stem and leaf, (ii) they suck the cell sap from various parts of the plant, and (iii) they bore into stem and fruits. They thus affect the health of the crop and reduce yields. Diseases in plants are caused by pathogens such as bacteria, fungi and viruses. These pathogens can be present in and transmitted through the soil, water and air. Weeds, insects and diseases can be controlled by various methods. O ne of the most commonly used methods is the use of pesticides, which include herbicides, insecticides and fungicides. These chemicals are sprayed on crop plants or used for treating seeds and soil. H owever, excessive use of these chemicals creates problems, since they can be poisonous to many plant and animal species and cause environmental pollution. Weed control methods also include mechanical removal. Preventive methods such as proper seed bed preparation, timely sowing of crops, intercropping and crop rotation also help in weed control. Some other preventive measures against pests are the use of resistant varieties, and summer ploughing, in which fields are ploughed deep in summers to destroy weeds and pests. uestion 1. Which of the following conditions will give the most benefits? Why? (a) Farmers use high-quality seeds, do not adopt irrigation or use fertilizers. (b) Farmers use ordinary seeds, adopt irrigation and use fertilizer. (c) Farmers use quality seeds, adopt irrigation, use fertilizer and use crop protection measures. Q Fig. 12.2 :Fig. 12.2 :Fig. 12.2 :Fig. 12.2 :Fig. 12.2 : Intercropping The growing of different crops on a piece of land in a pre-planned succession is known as crop rotation. Depending upon the duration, crop rotation is done for dif ferent crop combinations. The availability of moisture and irrigation facilities decide the choice of the crop to be cultivated after one harvest. If crop rotation is done properly then two or three crops can be grown in a year with good harvests. 12.1.3CROP PROTECTION MANAGEMENT Field crops are infested by a large number of weeds, insect pests and diseases. If weeds and pests are not controlled at the appropriate time then they can damage the crops so much that most of the crop is lost. Weeds are unwanted plants in the cultivated field, for example, Xanthium Reprint 2025-26
Intercropping is growing two or more — (gokhroo), Parthenium (gajar ghas), Cyperus crops simultaneously on the same field ina rotundus (motha). They compete for food, definite pattem (Fig.12.2). A few rows ofone — space and light. Weeds take up nutrients and crop alternate with a few rows of a second — reduce the growth of the crop. Therefore, crop, for example, soyabean + maize, or finger removal of weeds from cultivated fields during millet (bajra) + cowpea (lobia). The crops are the carly stages of crop growth is essential for selected such that their) nutrient a good harvest. requirements are different. This ensures Generally insect pests attack the plants maximum utilisation of the nutrients — in three ways: (i) they cut the root, stem and supplied, and also prevents pests and — leaf, (ii) they suck the cell sap from various diseases from spreading to all the plants — parts ofthe plant, and (fii) they bore into stem belonging to one crop in a field. This way. and fruits. They thus affect the health of the both crops can give better returns. crop and reduce yields. - Diseases in plants are caused by OKs DRE SRG. - pathogens such as bacteria, fungi and vinises. es el OS FEQD These pathogens can be present in and OLE CEQ eae) transmitted through the soil, water and air. SS Re Bes Weeds, insects and diseases can be 4 . PN NA Se controlled by various methods. One of the &. 3, & & & & ¢ most commonly used methads is the use of esd fp fo SBS. pesticides, which include herbicides, ABE OPI BAS ORD BOD BF insecticides and fungicides. These chemicals “ Ss & & x g & are sprayed on crop plants or used for treating he a opm RD oe WO seeds and soil. However, excessive use of 4 Dee yee 2 these chemicals creates problems, since they Cp Reraaty EER can be poisonous to many plant and animal OF OOO PER BEN OO, species and cause environmental pollution. KaKeS AN wie Weed control methods also include mechanical removal. Preventive methods Fig. 12.2 : Intercropping such as proper seed bed preparation, timely sowing of crops. intercropping and crop The growing of different crops on a piece rotation also help in weed control. Some other of land ina pre-planned succession is known preventive measures against pests are the use as crop rotation. Depending upon the — ofresistant varieties, and surnmer ploughing, duration, crop rotation is done for different in which fields are ploughed deep in sutnmers crop combinations. The availability of moisture to destroy weeds and pests. and irrigation facilities decide the choice of the crop to be cultivated after one harvest. If crop (" weshion rotation is done properly then two or three i |i ne . . — crops can be grown in a year with 1. Which of the following conditions good harvests. ° | wil give the most benefits? Whve ° (a) Farmers use high quality 12.1.3 CROP PROTECTION MANAGEMENT seeds, do net adopt irrigation or use fertilizers. Field crops are infested by a large number of MK (b}) Farmers use ordinary weeds, insect pests and diseases. If weeds and seeds, adopt irrigation and pests are not controlled at the appropriate use fertilizer. time then they can damage the crops so much (Farmers use quality seeds. that most of the crop is lost. adopt irrigation, use Weeds are unwanted plants in the fertilizer and use crop cultivated field, for example, Xanthium Protecuon mcasures, Ivprovesenr iv Foon ResoeRCES 145 Reprint 2025-26 :