[Page 3]
SCIENCE142 be of the same variety and germinate under the same conditions. Cultivation practices and crop yield are related to weather, soil quality and availability of water. Since weather conditions such as dr ought and flood situations ar e unpredictable, varieties that can be grown in diverse climatic conditions ar e useful. Similarly, varieties tolerant to high soil salinity have been developed. Some of the factors for which variety improvement is done are: • Higher yield: T o increase the productivity of the crop per acr e. • Impr oved quality: Quality considerations of crop products vary from crop to cr op. Baking quality is important in wheat, protein quality in pulses, oil quality in oilseeds and preserving quality in fruits and vegetables. • Biotic and abiotic r esistance: Cr ops production can go down due to biotic (diseases, insects and nematodes) and abiotic (dr ought, salinity, water logging, heat, cold and frost) stresses under dif ferent situations. V arieties resistant to these stresses can improve crop production. • Change in maturity duration: The shorter the duration of the crop from sowing to harvesting, the mor e economical is the variety. Such short durations allow far mers to gr ow multiple r ounds of cr ops in a year . Short duration also r educes the cost of crop production. Uniform maturity makes the harvesting pr ocess easy and reduces losses during harvesting. • Wider adaptability: Developing varieties for wider adaptability will help in stabilising the crop production under dif fer ent envir onmental conditions. One variety can then be gr own under dif ferent climatic conditions in different areas. • Desirable agronomic characteristics: Tallness and pr ofuse branching ar e desirable characters for fodder crops. Dwarfness is desired in cereals, so that less nutrients are consumed by these crops. Thus developing varieties of desired agronomic characters help give higher productivity. uestions 1. How do biotic and abiotic factors affect crop production? 2. What are the desirable agronomic characteristics for crop improvements? 12.1.2CROP PRODUCTION MANAGEMENT In India, as in many other agriculture-based countries, farming ranges from small to very large farms. Different farmers thus have more or less land, money and access to information and technologies. In short, it is the money or financial conditions that allow farmers to take up different farming practices and agricultural technologies. There is a correlation between higher inputs and yields. Thus, the farmer’s purchasing capacity for inputs decides cropping system and production practices. Therefore, production practices can be at different levels. They include ‘no cost’ production, ‘low cost’ production and ‘high cost’ production practices. 12.1.2 (i) NUTRIENT MANAGEMENT Just as we need food for development, growth and well-being, plants also require nutrients for growth. Nutrients are supplied to plants by air , water and soil. Ther e ar e several nutrients which are essential for plants. Air supplies carbon and oxygen, hydrogen comes from water, and soil supplies the other thirteen nutrients to plants. Amongst these, some are required in large quantities and are therefore called macro-nutrients. The other nutrients are used by plants in small quantities and are therefore called micro-nutrients (Table 12.1). Q Reprint 2025-26
be of the same variety and germinate under less nutrients are consumed by these the same conditions. crops. Thus developing varieties of Cultivation practices and crop yield are desired agronomic characters help give related to weather, soil quality and availability higher productivity. of water. Since weather conditions such as drought and = flood situations are (" Weshious unpredictable, varieties that can be grown in an diverse climatic conditions are useful. 1. How do biotic and abiotic tactors Similarly, varieties tolerant to high soil salinity | allect crop production? , have been developed. Some of the factors for 2. Whatare the desirable agronomic which variety improvement is done are: | characterises for crop e Higher yield: To increase the w) HPPOVCHICHES: productivity of the crop per acre. e Improved quality: Quality considerations of crop products vary from crop to crop. Baking quality is 12.1.2 CRop PRODUCTION MANAGEMENT important in wheat, protein quality in In India. as in many other agriculture-based pulses, oil quality in oilseeds and - corar . caite s countries, farming ranges from small to very preserving quality in fruits and . . : ; vegetables. large farms. Different farmers thus have more e Biotic and abiotic resistance: Crops °F less land. money and access to information production can go down due to biotic and technologies. In short, it is the money or (diseases, insects and nematodes) and financial conditions that allow farmers to take abiotic (drought, salinity, water up different farming practices and agricultural logging, heat, cold and frost) stresses technologies. There is a correlation between under different situations. Varieties higher inputs and yields. Thus, the farmer's resistant to these stresses can improve purchasing capacity for inputs decides crop production. cropping system and production practices e Change in maturity duration: The pping sys . p pre ” oe . . - Therefore. production practices can be at shorter the duration of the crop from ms . . sowing to harvesting, the more different levels. They include ‘no cost economical is the variety. Such short — Production, ‘low cost’ production and ‘high durations allow farmers to grow — cost production practices. multiple rounds of crops in a year. Short duration also reduces the cost — 12.1.2 (i) NUTRIENT MANAGEMENT of crop production. Uniform maturity . makes the harvesting process easy Just as we need food for development. growth and reduces losses during harvesting. and well-being, plants also require nutrients e Wider adaptability: Developing — for growth. Nutrients are supplied to plants varieties for wider adaptability will by air. water and soil. There are several help in stabilising the crop production nutrients which are essential for plants. Air under different environmental supplies carbon and oxygen. hydrogen comes conditions. One variety can then be from water, and soil supplies the other thirteen grown under different climatic . . ante . ee conditions in different areas. nutrients to plants. Amongst these. some are © Desirable agronomic characteristics: required in large quantities and are therefore Tallness and profuse branching are called macro-nutrients. The other nutrients are desirable characters for fodder crops. used by plants in small quantities and are Dwartness is desired in cereals, so that therefore called micro-nutrients (Table 12.1). 142 Science. Reprint 2025-26

[Page 4]
IMPROVEMENT IN FOOD RESOURCES 143 143143143143 our environment from excessive use of fertilizers. Using biological waste material is also a way of recycling farm waste. Based on the kind of biological material used, manure can be classified as: (i) Compost and vermi-compost: The process in which farm waste material like livestock excreta (cow dung, etc.), vegetable waste, animal r efuse, domestic waste, sewage waste, straw, eradicated weeds etc. is decomposed in pits is known as composting. The compost is rich in organic matter and nutrients. Compost is also pr epar ed by using earthwor ms to hasten the process of decomposition of plant and animal refuse. This is called vermi-compost. (ii) Green manure: Prior to the sowing of the crop seeds, some plants like sun hemp or guar ar e gr own and then mulched by ploughing them into the soil. These green plants thus turn into gr een manure which helps in enriching the soil in nitrogen and phosphorus. FERTILIZERS Fertilizers are commercially produced plant nutrients. Fertilizers supply nitr ogen, phosphorus and potassium. They ar e used to ensur e good vegetative gr owth (leaves, branches and flowers), giving rise to healthy plants. Fertilizers are a factor in the higher yields of high-cost farming. Fertilizers should be applied carefully in terms of proper dose, time, and observing pre- and post-application pr ecautions for their complete utilisation. For example, sometimes fertilizers get washed away due to excessive irrigation and are not fully absorbed by the plants. This excess fertilizer then leads to water pollution. Also, as we have seen in the previous class, continuous use of fertilizers in an area can destroy soil fertility because the organic matter in the soil is not replenished and micro-organisms in the soil are harmed by the fertilizers used. Short-term benefits of using fertilizers and long-term benefits of using Deficiency of these nutrients affects physiological processes in plants including reproduction, growth and susceptibility to diseases. To increase the yield, the soil can be enriched by supplying these nutrients in the form of manure and fertilizers. uestions 1. What ar e macr o-nutrients and why ar e they called macr o- nutrients? 2. How do plants get nutrients? MANURE Manure contains large quantities of organic matter and also supplies small quantities of nutrients to the soil. Manure is prepared by the decomposition of animal excreta and plant waste. Manure helps in enriching soil with nutrients and organic matter and increasing soil fertility. The bulk of or ganic matter in manure helps in improving the soil structure. This involves incr easing the water holding capacity in sandy soils. In clayey soils, the large quantities of organic matter help in drainage and in avoiding water logging. In using manure we use biological waste material, which is advantageous in protecting Table 12.1: Nutrients suppliedTable 12.1: Nutrients suppliedTable 12.1: Nutrients suppliedTable 12.1: Nutrients suppliedTable 12.1: Nutrients supplied by air, water and soilby air, water and soilby air, water and soilby air, water and soilby air, water and soil Air carbon, oxygen Water hydrogen, oxygen Soil (i) Macronutrients: nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, calcium, magnesium, sulphur (ii) Micronutrients: iron, manganese, boron, zinc, copper , molybdenum, chlorine Q Source SourceSource SourceSource NutrientsNutrientsNutrientsNutrientsNutrients Reprint 2025-26
our environment from excessive use of Table 12.1; Nutrients supplied fertilizers. Using biological waste material is by air, water and soil also a way of recycling farm waste. Based on the kind of biological material used, manure Source Nutrients can be classified as: {i) Compost and vermi-compost: The Air carbon, oxygen process in which farm waste material like livestock excreta (cow dung, etc.), Water hydrogen, oxygen vegetable waste, animal refuse, Soil (i) Macronutrients: domestic waste, sewage waste, straw, nitrogen, phosphorus. eradicated weeds etc. is decomposed potassium, caleium, in pits is known as composting. The magnesium, sulphur compost is rich in organic matter and - . nutrients. Compost is also prepared (if) Micronutrients: iron, manganese. boron by using earthworms to hasten the inn Bs : . process of decomposition of plant and zine, copper, : . fire Tie ja palle molybdenum, chlorine animal retuse. This is called vermi-compost. . . {ii) Green manure: Prior to the sowing of Deficiency of these nutrients affects the crop seeds, some plants like sun physiological processes in plants including hemp or guar are grown and then reproduction, growth and susceptibility to mulched by ploughing them into the diseases. To increase the yield. the soil can be soil. These green plants thus turn into enriched by supplying these nutrients in the green manure which helps in form of manure and fertilizers. enriching the soil in nitrogen . and phosphorus. (" westious } 2. What are macro-mutrients aud FERTILIZERS | why are thev called macro- Fertilizers are commercially produced plant nutrients? nutrients. Fertilizers supply nitrogen, | | 2. Howde plants get nutrients? phosphorus and potassium. They are used wo) to ensure good vegetative growth (leaves, branches and flowers), giving rise to healthy plants. Fertilizers are a factor in the higher MANURE yields of high-cost farming. Fertilizers should be applied carefully in Manure contains large quantities of organic terms of proper dose, time, and observing pre- matter and also supplies small quantities of and post-application precautions for ‘their nutrients to the soil. Manure is prepared by complete utilisation. For example, sometimes the decomposition of animal excreta and plant fertilizers get washed away due to excessive waste. Manure helps in enriching soil with irrigation and are not fully absorbed by the nutrients and organic matter and increasing plants. This excess fertilizer then leads to soil fertility. The bulk of organic matter in water pollution. manure helps in improving the soil structure. Also, as we have seen in the previous class, This involves increasing the water holding — continuous use of fertilizers in an area can capacity in sandy soils. In clayey soils. the — destroy soil fertility because the organic large quantities of organic matter help in matter in the soil is not replenished and drainage and in avoiding water logging. micro-organisms in the soil are harmed by the In using manure we use biological waste __ fertilizers used. Short-term benefits of using material, which is advantageous in protecting — fertilizers and long-term benefits of using Isproveseat i Foop Reset ices 143 Reprint 2025-26 :