[Page 1]
SCIENCE140 We know that all living organisms need food. Food supplies proteins, carbohydrates, fats, vitamins and minerals, all of which we require for body development, gr owth and health. Both plants and animals ar e major sources of food for us. W e obtain most of this food from agriculture and animal husbandry. We r ead in newspapers that ef forts ar e always being made to impr ove pr oduction from agriculture and animal husbandry. Why is this necessary? Why we cannot make do with the current levels of production? India is a very populous country. Our population is mor e than one billion people, and it is still growing. As food for this growing population, we will soon need mor e than a quarter of a billion tonnes of grain every year. This can be done by far ming on more land. But India is already intensively cultivated. As a result, we do not have any major scope for increasing the area of land under cultivation. Therefore, it is necessary to incr ease our production ef ficiency for both cr ops and livestock. Efforts to meet the food demand by incr easing food production have led to some successes so far . We have had the gr een revolution, which contributed to incr eased food-grain production. We have also had the white revolution, which has led to better and more efficient use as well as availability of milk. However, these revolutions mean that our natural resources are getting used more intensively. As a result, there are more chances of causing damage to our natural resources to the point of destroying their balance completely. Therefore, it is important that we should increase food production without degrading our environment and disturbing the balances maintaining it. Hence, there is a need for sustainable practices in agriculture and animal husbandry. Also, simply increasing grain production for storage in warehouses cannot solve the problem of malnutrition and hunger . People should have money to purchase food. Food security depends on both availability of food and access to it. The majority of our population depends on agriculture for their livelihood. Increasing the incomes of people working in agriculture is therefore necessary to combat the pr oblem of hunger . Scientific management practices should be undertaken to obtain high yields from farms. For sustained livelihood, one should undertake mixed farming, intercropping, and integrated farming practices, for example, combine agriculture with livestock/poultry/fisheries/ bee-keeping. The question thus becomes – how do we increase the yields of crops and livestock? 12.1 Improvement in Crop Yields Cereals such as wheat, rice, maize, millets and sorghum provide us carbohydrate for energy requirement. Pulses like gram ( chana), pea (matar), black gram (urad), green gram (moong), pigeon pea (arhar), lentil (masoor), provide us with protein. And oil seeds including soyabean, ground nut, sesame, castor, mustard, linseed and sunflower provide us with necessary fats (Fig. 12.1). Vegetables, spices and fruits pr ovide a range of vitamins and minerals in addition to small amounts of proteins, carbohydrates and fats. In addition to these food crops, fodder crops like berseem, oats or sudan grass are raised as food for the livestock. 12 I II IIMPROVEMENTMPROVEMENTMPROVEMENTMPROVEMENTMPROVEMENT IN ININ ININ F F F F FOOD OODOOD OODOOD R R R R RESOURCESESOURCESESOURCESESOURCESESOURCES C hapter Reprint 2025-26
ESE] Ade +, Cr 12 eset apter ide IMPROVEMENT IN Foop RESOURCES We know that all living organisms need food. — disturbing the balances maintaining it. Hence. Food supplies proteins, carbohydrates, fats. — there is a need for sustainable practices in vitamins and minerals, all of which we require agriculture and animal husbandry. for body development, growth and health. Also, simply increasing grain production Both plants and animals are major sources — for storage in warehouses cannot solve the of food for us. We obtain most of this food — problem of malnutrition and hunger. People from agriculture and animal husbandry. should have money to purchase food. Food We read in newspapers that efforts are security depends on both availability of food always being made to improve production and access to it. The majority of our from agriculture and animal husbandry. Why — population depends on agriculture for their is this necessary? Why we cannot make do _ livelihood. Increasing the incomes of people with the current levels of production? working in agriculture is therefore necessary India is a very populous country. Our — to combat the problem of hunger. Scientific population is more than one billion people. © management practices should be undertaken and it is still growing. As food for this growing to obtain high yields from farms. For population, we will soon need more than a — sustained livelihood, one should undertake quarter of a billion tonnes of grain every year. — mixed farming. intercropping, and integrated This can be done by farming on more land. — farming practices, for example, combine But India is already intensively cultivated. As agriculture with livestock/poultry/fisheries/ a result, we do not have any major scope for — bee-keeping. increasing the area of land under cultivation. The question thus becomes - how do we Therefore, it is necessary to increase our — increase the yields of crops and livestock’? production efficiency for both crops and livestock. 12.1 Improvement in Crop Yields Efforts to meet the food demand by increasing food production have led to some — Cereals such as wheat, rice. maize, millets and successes so far. We have had the green — sorghum provide us carbohydrate for energy revolution, which contributed to increased = requirement. Pulses like gram (chana), pea food-grain production. We have also had the — (mataz), black gram (urad), green gram (moong), white revolution, which has led to better and pigeon pea (arhay), lentil (masoos, provide us with more efficient use as well as availability of milk. — protein. And oil seeds including soyabean, However, these revolutions mean that our — ground nut, sesame, castor, mustard, linseed and natural resources are getting used more — sunflower provide us with necessary fats (Fig. intensively. As a result, there are more 12.1). Vegetables. spices and fruits provide a chances of causing damage to our natural — range of vitamins and minerals in addition to resources to the point of destroying their — small amounts of proteins, carbohydrates and balance completely. Therefore, it is important fats. In addition to these food crops, fodder crops that we should increase food production — like berseem, oats or sudan grass are raised as without degrading our environment and food for the livestock. Reprint 2025-26

[Page 2]
IMPROVEMENT IN FOOD RESOURCES 141 the kharif season from the month of June to October, and some of the crops are grown in the winter season, called the rabi season from November to April. Paddy, soyabean, pigeon pea, maize, cotton, gr een gram and black gram are kharif crops, wher eas wheat, gram, peas, mustard, linseed are rabi crops. In India ther e has been a four times increase in the production of food grains from 1952 to 2010 with only 25% increase in the cultivable land area. How has this incr ease in production been achieved? If we think of the practices involved in farming, we can see that we can divide it into thr ee stages. The first is the choice of seeds for planting. The second is the nurturing of the cr op plants. The third is the protection of the growing and harvested crops from loss. Thus, the major groups of activities for improving crop yields can be classified as: • Crop variety improvement • Crop production improvement • Crop protection management. 12.1.1CROP VARIETY IMPROVEMENT This approach depends on finding a crop variety that can give a good yield. Varieties or strains of crops can be selected by breeding for various useful characteristics such as disease r esistance, r esponse to fertilisers, product quality and high yields. One way of incorporating desirable characters into crop varieties is by hybridisation. Hybridisation refers to cr ossing between genetically dissimilar plants. This cr ossing may be intervarietal (between dif ferent varieties), interspecific (between two different species of the same genus) or inter generic (between different genera). Another way of impr oving the crop is by introducing a gene that would provide the desir ed characteristic. This results in genetically modified crops. For new varieties of crops to be accepted, it is necessary that the variety produces high yields under dif ferent conditions that ar e found in different areas. Farmers would need to be provided with good quality seeds of a particular variety, that is, the seeds should all Fig. 12.1: Different types of crops uestion 1. What do we get fr om cer eals, pulses, fruits and vegetables? Different crops require different climatic conditions, temperature and photoperiods for their growth and completion of their life cycle. Photoperiods are related to the duration of sunlight. Growth of plants and flowering are dependent on sunlight. As we all know, plants manufacture their food in sunlight by the process of photosynthesis. There are some crops, which are grown in rainy season, called Q Reprint 2025-26
iii | mic, . the Kharifseason from the month of June to j i. if BB og) : ry et October, and some of the crops are grown in {, | pS ‘A; sees 3, the winter season. called the rab/season from iB 3 SS SON, , See *s November to April. Paddy, soyabean, pigeon t | : = TAY ry (7 pea, maize, cotton, green gram and black .B i AOS foal 2 gram are Kharifcrops, whereas wheat, gram, Ps | ! ewe - peas, mustard, linseed are rabi crops. In India there has been a four times ep eta MA increase in the production of food grains from 5 ‘ Ge ¢ R at a - . 1952 to 2010 with only 25% increase in the it NN uy} a y 4s cultivable land area. How has this increase AME Bi ne 1a \ 3 4 - : y | in production been achieved’? If we think of ay ¥ a ES way fe cee the practices involved in farming, we can see 4 a : « is a" i that we can divide it into three stages. The ie \ : “Li first is the choice of seeds for planting. The ifiass* . A second is the nurturing of the crop plants. hy ee . The third is the protection of the growing and aE harvested crops from loss. Thus, the major groups of activities for improving crop yields mo a can be classified as: T ¢ Crop variety improvement ‘ | an e Crop production improvement & 1 | e Crop protection management. oy yy 12.1.1 Crop VARIETY IMPROVEMENT | | | ‘ This approach depends on finding a crop ee _ fg | variety that can give a good yield. Varieties or N . a : strains of crops can be selected by breeding _ > = RN for various useful characteristics such as disease resistance, response to fertilisers, Fig. 12.1: Different types of crops product quality and high yields. One way of incorporating desirable characters into crop \ westi varieties is by hybridisation. Hybridisation ff)ue SUON refers to crossing between genetically 1. What do we get tron cercals. dissimilar plants. This crossing may be | pulses, truits and vegetables? intervarietal (between different varieties), \ interspecific (between two different species of the same genus) or intergeneric (between <) different genera). Another way of improving Different crops require different climatic — the crop is by introducing a gene that would conditions, temperature and photoperiods for — provide the desired characteristic. This their growth and completion of their life cycle. results in genetically modified crops. Photoperiods are related to the duration of For new varieties of crops to be accepted, sunlight. Growth of plants and flowering are it is necessary that the variety produces high dependent on sunlight. As we all know, plants — yields under different conditions that are manufacture their food in sunlight by the — found in different areas. Farmers would need process of photosynthesis. There are some — to be provided with good quality seeds of a crops, which are grown in rainy season, called particular variety, that is, the seeds should all Isproveseat i Foop Reset ices 41 Reprint 2025-26 :