[Page 11]
SCIENCE150 uestions 1. How are fish obtained? 2. What ar e the advantages of composite fish culture? Activity _____________ 12.5 • Visit a fish farm in fish breeding season and note the following: (1) Varieties of fish in fish far m (2) Types of ponds (3) Feed ingredients used (4) Production capacity of the farm If there are no fish farms close to your locality, gather the above information from Internet, by referring books or talking to people who are engaged in fishery. 12.2.4BEE-KEEPING Honey is widely used and ther efore bee- keeping for making honey has become an agricultural enterprise. Since bee-keeping needs low investments, farmers use it as an additional income generating activity. In addition to honey, the beehives are a source of wax which is used in various medicinal preparations. The local varieties of bees used for commercial honey production are Apis cerana indica, commonly known as the Indian bee, A. dorsata, the rock bee and A. florae, the little bee. An Italian bee variety, A. mellifera, has also been brought in to increase yield of honey. This is the variety commonly used for commercial honey production. The Italian bees have high honey collection capacity. They sting somewhat less. They stay in a given beehive for long periods, and breed very well. For commercial honey production, bee farms or apiaries are established. The value or quality of honey depends upon the pasturage, or the flowers available to the bees for nectar and pollen collection. In addition to adequate quantity of pasturage, the kind of flowers available will deter mine the taste of the honey. uestions 1. What ar e the desirable characters of bee varieties suitable for honey production? 2. What is pasturage and how is it related to honey production? Q (a) (b) Fig. 12.7: (a) Arrangement of beehive in an apiary (b) honey extractor Q What you have learnt • There are several nutrients essential for crops. Of these, some are required in large quantities and are known as macro-nutrients whereas rest of the nutrients are required in small quantities and are known as micro-nutrients. • Manure and fertilizers are the main sources of nutrient supply to crops. • Organic farming is a farming system with minimal or no use of chemicals as fertilizers, herbicides, pesticides etc. and Reprint 2025-26
()\ uestions ge | 1 How are tish obtained? met eli F | 2 What arc the advantages ot 2 “Gri i nt . \ composite tish culawe? Seeks y.- * 7° Activity 12.5 See * Visit a fish farm in fish breeding (a) tb) season and note the following: (1} Varieties of fish in fish farm Fig. 12.7. fa} Arrangement of beehive in an apiary (2} Types of ponds tb} honey extractor (3} Feed ingredients used (4) Production capacity of the farm This is the variety commonly used for If there are no fish farms close to your commercial honey production. locality, gather the above information from The Italian bees have high honey collection internet _ DY referring books of talking 10 capacity. They sting somewhat less. They stay People Who are engaged in NSnery- in a given beehive for long periods, and breed very well. For commercial honey production, 12.2.4 BEE-KEEPING bee farms or apiaries are established. Honey is widely used and therefore bee- The value or quality of honey depends keeping for making honey has become an — upon the pasturage, or the flowers available agricultural enterprise. Since bee-keeping — to the bees for nectar and pollen collection. needs low investments, farmers use itas an — In addition to adequate quantity of pasturage, additional income generating activity. In the kind of flowers available will determine addition to honey, the beehives are a source the taste of the honey. of wax which is used in various medicinal preparations. uestions The local varieties of bees used for | , , commercial honey production are Apis cerana | 1 What are the desirable indica, commonly known as the Indian bee. characters of bee varictics A. dorsata, the rock bee and A. florae, the little suitable for honey production? bee. An Italian bee variety. A. mellifera, has \ 2. Whatis pasturage and how is it also been brought in to increase yield of honey. y relied to honey production? (dS What ? & Aig: you have gi" Mi” / learnt — . * There are several nutrients essential for crops. Of these, some are required in large quantities and are known as macro-nutrients whereas rest of the nutrients are required in small quantities and are known as micro-nutrients. ° Manure and fertilizers are the main sources of nutrient supply to crops. ° Organic farming is a farming system with minimal or no use of chemicals as fertilizers, herbicides, pesticides ete. and 150 Science. Reprint 2025-26

[Page 12]
IMPROVEMENT IN FOOD RESOURCES 151 with a maximum input of organic manures, recyled farm wastes, and bio-agents, with healthy cropping systems. • Mixed farming is a system of farming on a particular farm which includes crop production, raising of livestock etc. • Mixed cropping is growing of two or more crops simultaneously on the same piece of land. • Growing two or mor e crops in definite row patterns is known as inter - cropping. • The growing of different crops on a piece of land in pre-planned succession is called crop rotation. • Varietal improvement is r equired for higher yield, good quality, biotic and abiotic resistance, shortening the maturity duration, wider adaptability and desirable agronomic characteristics. • Farm animals r equire pr oper car e and management such as shelter , feeding, breeding and disease control. This is called animal husbandry. • Poultry farming is done to raise domestic fowls. Poultry production includes egg production and broiler production for poultry meat. • To enhance poultry production, cross breeding is done between Indian and exotic breeds for variety improvement. • Fish may be obtained from marine resources as well as inland resources. • To increase production of fish, they can be cultured in marine and inland ecosystems. • Marine fish capture is done by fishing nets guided by echo-sounders and satellites. • Composite fish culture system is commonly used for fish farming. • Bee-keeping is done to get honey and wax. Exercises 1. Explain any one method of crop production which ensures high yield. 2. Why are manure and fertilizers used in fields? 3. What are the advantages of inter -cropping and cr op rotation? 4. What is genetic manipulation? How is it useful in agricultural practices? 5. How do storage grain losses occur? 6. How do good animal husbandry practices benefit farmers? 7. What are the benefits of cattle farming? 8. For increasing production, what is common in poultry, fisheries and bee-keeping? 9. How do you differentiate between capture fishing, mariculture and aquaculture? Reprint 2025-26
with a maximum input of organic manures, recyled farm wastes, and bio-agents, with healthy cropping systems. ° Mixed farming is a system of farming on a particular farm which includes crop production, raising of livestock ete. ° Mixed cropping is growing of two or more crops simultaneously on the same piece of land. ° Growing two or more crops in definite row patterns is known as inter- cropping. ° The growing of different crops on a piece of land in pre-planned succession is called crop rotation. ° Varictal improvement is required for higher yield, good quality, biotic and abiotic resistanee, shortening the maturity duration, wider adaptability and desirable agronomic characteristics. ° Farm animals require proper care and management such as shelter, feeding, breeding and disease control. This is called animal hushandry. ° Poultry farming is done to raise domestic fowls. Poultry production includes egg production and broiler production for poultry meat. ° To enhance poultry production, cross breeding is done between Indian and exotic breeds for variety improvement. ° Fish may be obtained from marine resources as well as inland resources. ° To increase production of fish, they can be cultured in marine and inland ecosystems. ° Marine fish capture is done by fishing nets guided by echo-sounders and satellites. e Composite fish culture system is commonly used for fish farming. ° Bee-keeping is done to get honey and wax. . Exercises C.ti‘C;SC~*”r 1. Explain any one method of crop production which ensures high yield. 2. Why are manure and fertilizers used in fields’? ry i 3. What are the advantages of inter-cropping and crop rotation? ! LS; 4. What is genetic manipulation? How is it useful in agricultural practices? > P 5. How do storage grain losses occur? 7 6. How do good animal hushandry practices benefit farmers? SN 7. What are the benefits of cattle farming? 8. For increasing production, what is common in poultry, fisheries and bee-keeping? 9. How do you differentiate between capture fishing, mariculture and aquaculture? Iaracneaent is Foon Resor wees 151 Reprint 2025-26 :