[Page 4]
IMPROVEMENT IN FOOD RESOURCES 143 143143143143 our environment from excessive use of fertilizers. Using biological waste material is also a way of recycling farm waste. Based on the kind of biological material used, manure can be classified as: (i) Compost and vermi-compost: The process in which farm waste material like livestock excreta (cow dung, etc.), vegetable waste, animal r efuse, domestic waste, sewage waste, straw, eradicated weeds etc. is decomposed in pits is known as composting. The compost is rich in organic matter and nutrients. Compost is also pr epar ed by using earthwor ms to hasten the process of decomposition of plant and animal refuse. This is called vermi-compost. (ii) Green manure: Prior to the sowing of the crop seeds, some plants like sun hemp or guar ar e gr own and then mulched by ploughing them into the soil. These green plants thus turn into gr een manure which helps in enriching the soil in nitrogen and phosphorus. FERTILIZERS Fertilizers are commercially produced plant nutrients. Fertilizers supply nitr ogen, phosphorus and potassium. They ar e used to ensur e good vegetative gr owth (leaves, branches and flowers), giving rise to healthy plants. Fertilizers are a factor in the higher yields of high-cost farming. Fertilizers should be applied carefully in terms of proper dose, time, and observing pre- and post-application pr ecautions for their complete utilisation. For example, sometimes fertilizers get washed away due to excessive irrigation and are not fully absorbed by the plants. This excess fertilizer then leads to water pollution. Also, as we have seen in the previous class, continuous use of fertilizers in an area can destroy soil fertility because the organic matter in the soil is not replenished and micro-organisms in the soil are harmed by the fertilizers used. Short-term benefits of using fertilizers and long-term benefits of using Deficiency of these nutrients affects physiological processes in plants including reproduction, growth and susceptibility to diseases. To increase the yield, the soil can be enriched by supplying these nutrients in the form of manure and fertilizers. uestions 1. What ar e macr o-nutrients and why ar e they called macr o- nutrients? 2. How do plants get nutrients? MANURE Manure contains large quantities of organic matter and also supplies small quantities of nutrients to the soil. Manure is prepared by the decomposition of animal excreta and plant waste. Manure helps in enriching soil with nutrients and organic matter and increasing soil fertility. The bulk of or ganic matter in manure helps in improving the soil structure. This involves incr easing the water holding capacity in sandy soils. In clayey soils, the large quantities of organic matter help in drainage and in avoiding water logging. In using manure we use biological waste material, which is advantageous in protecting Table 12.1: Nutrients suppliedTable 12.1: Nutrients suppliedTable 12.1: Nutrients suppliedTable 12.1: Nutrients suppliedTable 12.1: Nutrients supplied by air, water and soilby air, water and soilby air, water and soilby air, water and soilby air, water and soil Air carbon, oxygen Water hydrogen, oxygen Soil (i) Macronutrients: nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, calcium, magnesium, sulphur (ii) Micronutrients: iron, manganese, boron, zinc, copper , molybdenum, chlorine Q Source SourceSource SourceSource NutrientsNutrientsNutrientsNutrientsNutrients

[Page 5]
SCIENCE144 India has a wide variety of water resources and a highly varied climate. Under such conditions, several different kinds of irrigation systems are adopted to supply water to agricultural lands depending on the kinds of water resources available. These include wells, canals, rivers and tanks. • Wells: There are two types of wells, namely dug wells and tube wells. In a dug well, water is collected from water bearing strata. Tube wells can tap water fr om the deeper strata. Fr om these wells, water is lifted by pumps for irrigation. • Canals: This is usually an elaborate and extensive irrigation system. In this system canals receive water fr om one or more reservoirs or from rivers. The main canal is divided into branch canals having further distributaries to irrigate fields. • River Lift Systems : In ar eas where canal flow is insuf ficient or irregular due to inadequate r eservoir r elease, the lift system is more rational. Water is directly drawn fr om the rivers for supplementing irrigation in ar eas close to rivers. • Tanks: These ar e small storage reservoirs, which intercept and store the run-of f of smaller catchment areas. Fresh initiatives for increasing the water available for agricultur e include rainwater harvesting and watershed management. This involves building small check-dams which lead to an incr ease in gr ound water levels. The check-dams stop the rainwater fr om flowing away and also reduce soil erosion. 12.1.2 (iii) CROPPING PATTERNS Different ways of growing crops can be used to give maximum benefit. Mixed cropping is gr owing two or mor e crops simultaneously on the same piece of land, for example, wheat + gram, or wheat + mustard, or gr oundnut + sunflower . This reduces risk and gives some insurance against failure of one of the crops. manure for maintaining soil fertility have to be considered while aiming for optimum yields in crop production. uestion 1. Compare the use of manure and fertilizers in maintaining soil fertility. Organic farming is a farming system with minimal or no use of chemicals as fertilizers, herbicides, pesticides, etc., and with a maximum input of organic manures, recycled farm-wastes (straw and livestock excreta), use of bio-agents such as cultur e of blue green algae in pr eparation of biofertilizers, neem leaves or turmeric specifically in grain storage as bio-pesticides, with healthy cr opping systems [mixed cropping, inter-cropping and crop rotation as discussed below in 12.1.2.(iii)]. These cropping systems are beneficial in insect, pest and wheat control besides providing nutrients. 12.1.2 (ii) IRRIGATION Most agriculture in India is rain-fed, that is, the success of cr ops in most ar eas is dependent on timely monsoons and sufficient rainfall spread through most of the growing season. Hence, poor monsoons cause cr op failure. Ensuring that the crops get water at the right stages during their growing season can increase the expected yields of any crop. Therefore, many measures are used to bring more and more agricultural land under irrigation. Q More to know Droughts occur because of scarcity or irregular distribution of rains. Drought poses a threat to rain-fed farming areas, where farmers do not use irrigation for crop production and depend only on rain. Light soils have less water retention capacity. In areas with light soils, crops get adversely affected by drought conditions. Scientists have developed some crop varieties which can tolerate drought conditions.

[Page 6]
IMPROVEMENT IN FOOD RESOURCES 145 145145145145 Inter-cropping is growing two or more crops simultaneously on the same field in a definite pattern (Fig.12.2). A few rows of one crop alternate with a few rows of a second crop, for example, soyabean + maize, or finger millet (bajra) + cowpea (lobia). The crops are selected such that their nutrient requirements are different. This ensures maximum utilisation of the nutrients supplied, and also prevents pests and diseases from spreading to all the plants belonging to one crop in a field. This way , both crops can give better returns. ( gokhroo), Parthenium (gajar ghas), Cyperus rotundus ( motha). They compete for food, space and light. Weeds take up nutrients and reduce the growth of the crop. Therefore, removal of weeds from cultivated fields during the early stages of crop growth is essential for a good harvest. Generally insect pests attack the plants in three ways: (i) they cut the root, stem and leaf, (ii) they suck the cell sap from various parts of the plant, and (iii) they bore into stem and fruits. They thus affect the health of the crop and reduce yields. Diseases in plants are caused by pathogens such as bacteria, fungi and viruses. These pathogens can be present in and transmitted through the soil, water and air. Weeds, insects and diseases can be controlled by various methods. O ne of the most commonly used methods is the use of pesticides, which include herbicides, insecticides and fungicides. These chemicals are sprayed on crop plants or used for treating seeds and soil. H owever, excessive use of these chemicals creates problems, since they can be poisonous to many plant and animal species and cause environmental pollution. Weed control methods also include mechanical removal. Preventive methods such as proper seed bed preparation, timely sowing of crops, intercropping and crop rotation also help in weed control. Some other preventive measures against pests are the use of resistant varieties, and summer ploughing, in which fields are ploughed deep in summers to destroy weeds and pests. uestion 1. Which of the following conditions will give the most benefits? Why? (a) Farmers use high-quality seeds, do not adopt irrigation or use fertilizers. (b) Farmers use ordinary seeds, adopt irrigation and use fertilizer. (c) Farmers use quality seeds, adopt irrigation, use fertilizer and use crop protection measures. Q Fig. 12.2 :Fig. 12.2 :Fig. 12.2 :Fig. 12.2 :Fig. 12.2 : Intercropping The growing of different crops on a piece of land in a pre-planned succession is known as crop rotation. Depending upon the duration, crop rotation is done for different crop combinations. The availability of moisture and irrigation facilities decide the choice of the crop to be cultivated after one harvest. If crop rotation is done properly then two or three crops can be grown in a year with good harvests. 12.1.3CROP PROTECTION MANAGEMENT Field crops are infested by a large number of weeds, insect pests and diseases. If weeds and pests are not controlled at the appropriate time then they can damage the crops so much that most of the crop is lost. Weeds are unwanted plants in the cultivated field, for example, Xanthium