[Page 9]
SCIENCE148 (ii) dwarf broiler parent for commercial chick production; (iii) summer adaptation capacity/ tolerance to high temperature; (iv) low maintenance requirements; (v) reduction in the size of the egg-laying bird with ability to utilise mor e fibrous cheaper diets for mulated using agricultural by-products. The ration (daily food requirement) for broilers is protein rich with adequate fat. The level of vitamins A and K is kept high in the poultry feeds. Poultry fowl suf fer fr om a number of diseases caused by virus, bacteria, fungi, parasites, as well as fr om nutritional deficiencies. These necessitate pr oper cleaning, sanitation, and spraying of disinfectants at regular intervals. Appropriate vaccination can pr event the occurr ence of infectious diseases and reduce loss of poultry during an outbreak of disease. uestions 1. What management practices are common in dairy and poultry farming? 2. What are the differences between broilers and layers and in their management? Activity _____________ 12.4 • Visit a local poultry farm. Observe types of breeds and note the type of ration, housing and lighting facilities given to them. Identify the growers, layers and broilers. 12.2.3FISH PRODUCTION Fish is a cheap source of animal protein for our food. Fish production includes the finned true fish as well as shellfish such as prawns and molluscs. There are two ways of obtaining fish. One is from natural resources, which is called capture fishing. The other way is by fish farming, which is called culture fishery. The water source of the fish can be either seawater or fresh water, such as in rivers and ponds. Fishing can thus be done both by capture and cultur e of fish in marine and freshwater ecosystems. 12.2.3 (i) MARINE FISHERIES India’s marine fishery resources include 7500 km of coastline and the deep seas Fig. 12.4 Aseel Leghorn uestion 1. Discuss the implications of the following statement: “It is inter esting to note that poultry is India’s most ef ficient converter of low fibre food stuf f (which is unfit for human consumption) into highly nutritious animal protein food.” EGG AND BROILER PRODUCTION Broiler chickens ar e fed with vitamin-rich supplementary feed for good growth rate and better feed efficiency. Care is taken to avoid mortality and to maintain feathering and carcass quality. They are produced as broilers and sent to market for meat purposes. For good production of poultry birds, good management practices are important. These include maintenance of temperatur e and hygienic conditions in housing and poultry feed, as well as pr evention and contr ol of diseases and pests. The housing, nutritional and environmental requirements of br oilers are somewhat different from those of egg layers. Q Q Reprint 2025-26
(ii) dwarf broiler parent for commercial The ration (daily food requirement) for broilers chick production: is protein rich with adequate fat. The level of {ii) summer adaptation capacity/ vitamins A and K is kept high in the poultry tolerance to high temperature: feeds. (iv) low maintenance requirements: Poultry fowl suffer from a number of (vy) reduction in the size of the egg-laying — diseases caused by virus, bacteria, fungi, bird with ability to utilise more parasites. as well as from nutritional fibrous cheaper diets formulated deficiencies. These necessitate proper using agricultural by-products. cleaning, sanitation, and spraying of disinfectants at regular intervals. Appropriate vaccination can prevent the occurrence of " ag. ar, G, infectious diseases and reduce loss of poultry is a= \' . during an outbreak of disease. L -) ree A) uestions : | | ¢@. Whatinanagement practices arc ] er > conmnon in dairy and powlay ae imei Y om | farming? Aseel Leghorn — | 2. Whatare the dittercnecs benveen | broflers and lavers and in their Fig. 12.4 managenicnl? westion M ; ae . Activity id 1. Discuss the implications of the following statement: . Visit a local poultry farm. Observe | “Hois intercsding ta note Cat types of breeds and note the type of | poultry is India's most ctticient ration. housing and lighting facilities | converter of low fibre food stutt given to them. Identity the growers, ww) . : an layers and broilers. (whieh is antic for human . consumption) into highly nutvidious aninua protcin food. 12.2.3 FISH PRODUCTION EGG AND BROILER PRODUCTION Fish is a cheap source of animal protein for . our food. Fish production includes the finned Broiler chickens are fed with vitamin-rich true fish as well as shellfish such as prawns supplementary feed for good growth rate and and molluses. There are two ways of obtaining better feed efficiency. Care is taken to avoid fish. One is from natural resources. which is mortality and to maintain feathering and — eatled capture fishing. The other way is by carcass quality. They are produced as broilers fish farming, which is called culture fishery. and sent to market for meat purposes. The water source of the fish can be either For good production of poultry birds, good seawater or fresh water, such as in rivers and management practices are important. These ponds. Fishing can thus be done both by include maintenance of temperature and — capture and culture of fish in marine and hygienic conditions in housing and poultry freshwater ecosystems. feed. as well as prevention and control of diseases and pests. 12.2.3 (i) MARINE FISHERIES The housing. nutritional and environmental requirements of broilers are — India’s marine fishery resources include somewhat different from those of egg layers. 7500 km of coastline and the deep seas 148 Science. : Reprint 2025-26

[Page 10]
IMPROVEMENT IN FOOD RESOURCES 149 beyond it. Popular marine fish varieties include pomphret, mackerel, tuna, sardines, and Bombay duck. Marine fish ar e caught using many kinds of fishing nets from fishing boats. Yields are increased by locating large schools of fish in the open sea using satellites and echo-sounders. Some marine fish of high economic value are also far med in seawater . This includes finned fishes like mullets, bhetki, and pearl spots, shellfish such as prawns (Fig. 12.5), mussels and oysters as well as seaweed. Oysters ar e also cultivated for the pearls they make. Macrobrachium rosenbergii (fresh water) Peneaus monodon (marine) Fig. 12.5 : Fresh water and marine prawns As marine fish stocks get further depleted, the demand for more fish can only be met by such cultur e fisheries, a practice called mariculture. 12.2.3 (ii) INLAND FISHERIES Fresh water resources include canals, ponds, reservoirs and rivers. Brackish water resour ces, where seawater and fr esh water mix together, such as estuaries and lagoons are also important fish r eservoirs. While capture fishing is also done in such inland water bodies, the yield is not high. Most fish production from these resources is thr ough aquaculture. Fish cultur e is sometimes done in combination with a rice crop, so that fish are grown in the water in the paddy field. Mor e intensive fish far ming can be done in composite fish cultur e systems. Both local and imported fish species ar e used in such systems. In such a system, a combination of five or six fish species is used in a single fishpond. These species ar e selected so that they do not compete for food among them having different types of food habits. As a result, the food available in all the parts of the pond is used. As Catlas are sur face feeders, Rohus feed in the middle-zone of the pond, Mrigals and Common Carps are bottom feeders, and Grass Carps feed on the weeds, together these species (Fig. 12.6) can use all the food in the pond without competing with each other. This increases the fish yield from the pond. (a) (b) (c) (d) Fig. 12.6: (a) Catla (b) Silver carp (c) Rohu (d) Grass Carp (e) Mrigal (f) Common Carp (e) (f) One problem with such composite fish culture is that many of these fish breed only during monsoon. Even if fish seed is collected from the wild, it can be mixed with that of other species as well. So, a major problem in fish farming is the lack of availability of good- quality seed. To overcome this problem, ways have now been worked out to breed these fish in ponds using hor monal stimulation. This has ensured the supply of pur e fish seed in desir ed quantities. Reprint 2025-26
beyond it. Popular marine fish varieties In such a system, a combination of five or include pomphret, mackerel. tuna, sardines, six fish species is used in a single fishpond. and Bombay duck. Marine fish are caught These species are selected so that they do using many Kinds of fishing nets from fishing — not compete for food among them having boats. Yields are increased by locating large different types of food habits. As a result, the schools of fish in the open sea using satellites food available in all the parts of the pond is and echo-sounders. used. As Catlas are surface feeders, Rohus Some marine fish of high economic value feed in the middle-zone of the pond, Mrigals are also farmed in seawater. This includes | and Common Carps are bottom feeders, and finned fishes like mullets. bhetki, and pearl Grass Carps feed on the weeds, together these spots, shellfish such as prawns (Fig. 12.5). species (Fig. 12.6) can use all the food in the mussels and oysters as well as seaweed. pond without competing with each other. This Oysters are also cultivated for the pearls increases the fish yield from the pond. they make. ~ {a} oC (b) Macrobrachtum rosenbergit Peneaus monodan Mreshs water} fmarine} {c] (d) As marine fish stocks get further depleted. the demand for more fish can only be met by such culture fisheries, a practice called p ition “ 12.2.3 (ii) INLAND FISHERIES e) Ne “ Fresh water resources include canals, ponds. () reservoirs and rivers. Brackish water resources, where seawater and fresh water Pig. 12.6: (a) Catla (bj Silver carp {c] Rohu (dj) Grass mix together, such as estuaries and lagoons Carp (e} Mrigal (9 Common Carp are also important fish reservoirs. While capture fishing is also done in such inland One problem with such composite fish water bodies, the yield is not high. Most fish — culture is that many of these fish breed only production from these resources is through — during monsoon. Even if fish seed is collected aquaculture. from the wild, it can be mixed with that of Fish culture is sometimes done in — other species as well. So, a major problem in combination with a rice crop, so that fish are fish farming is the lack of availability of good - grown in the water in the paddy field. More — quality seed. To overcome this problem, ways intensive fish farming can be done in — have now been worked out to breed these fish composite fish culture systems. Both local — in ponds using hormonal stimulation. This and imported fish species are used in such — has ensured the supply of pure fish seed in systems. desired quantities. Isproveseat i Foop Reset ices 149 Reprint 2025-26 :