[Page 7]
SCIENCE146 Activity 12.1 • Visit a nearby garden/agricultural field and make a list of the weeds and the flowers/crops found in the area. Also, make a list of insect pests, if any, infesting the flowers/crops. STORAGE OF GRAINS Storage losses in agricultural produce can be very high. Factors responsible for such losses are biotic— insects, rodents, fungi, mites and bacteria, and abiotic— inappropriate moisture and temperatures in the place of storage. These factors cause degradation in quality, loss in weight, poor germinability, discolouration of produce, all leading to poor marketability. These factors can be controlled by proper treatment and by systematic management of warehouses. Preventive and control measures are used before grains are stored for future use. They include strict cleaning of the produce before storage, proper drying of the produce first in sunlight and then in shade, and fumigation using chemicals that can kill pests. uestions 1. Why should preventive measures and biological control methods be preferred for protecting crops? 2. What factors may be responsible for losses of grains during storage? Activity 12.2 • Collect grains/seeds of cereals, pulses and oil seeds and gather information about the seasons in which they are sown and harvested. 12.2Animal Husbandry Animal husbandry is the scientific management of animal livestock. It includes various aspects such as feeding, breeding and disease contr ol. Animal-based far ming includes cattle, goat, sheep, poultry and fish farming. As the population increases and as living standar ds incr ease, the demand for milk, eggs and meat is also going up. Also, the gr owing awar eness of the need for humane treatment of livestock has br ought in new limitations in livestock farming. Thus, livestock production also needs to be improved. 12.2.1CATTLE FARMING Cattle husbandry is done for two purposes— milk and draught labour for agricultural work such as tilling, irrigation and carting. Indian cattle belong to two different species, Bos indicus, cows, and Bos bubalis , buf faloes. Milk-pr oducing females ar e called milch animals (dairy animals), while the ones used for farm labour are called draught animals. Milk production depends, to some extent, on the duration of the lactation period, meaning the period of milk production after Q Table 12.2: Nutritional values of animal products Animal Products Fat Protein Sugar Minerals Water Vitamins Milk (Cow) 3.60 4.00 4.50 0.70 87.20 B1, B2, B12, D, E Egg 12.00 13.00 * 1.00 74.00 B2, D Meat 3.60 21.10 * 1.10 74.20 B2, B12 Fish 2.50 19.00 * 1.30 77.20 Niacin, D, A *Present in very small amounts Per cent (%) Nutrients

[Page 8]
IMPROVEMENT IN FOOD RESOURCES 147 the birth of a calf. So, milk production can be increased by increasing the lactation period. Exotic or foreign breeds (for example, Jersey, Brown Swiss) are selected for long lactation periods, while local breeds (for example, Red Sindhi, Sahiwal) show excellent resistance to diseases. The two can be cross-bred to get animals with both the desired qualities. uestion 1. Which method is commonly used for improving cattle breeds and why? Activity 12.3 • Visit a livestock farm. Note the following: (1) Number of cattle and number of different breeds. (2) The amount of daily milk production from the different breeds. Proper cleaning and shelter facilities for cows and buffaloes are required for humane farming, for the health of the animals and for production of clean milk as well. Animals require regular brushing to remove dirt and loose hair. They should be sheltered under well-ventilated roofed sheds that protect them from rain, heat and cold. The floor of the cattle shed needs to be sloping so as to stay dry and to facilitate cleaning. The food r equirements of dairy animals are of two types: (a) maintenance requirement, which is the food r equired to support the animal to live a healthy life, and (b) milk producing requirement, which is the type of food r equired during the lactation period. Animal feed includes: (a) r oughage, which is largely fibr e, and (b) concentrates, which are low in fibre and contain relatively high levels of pr oteins and other nutrients. Cattle need balanced rations containing all nutrients in proportionate amounts. Besides such nutritious food material, certain feed additives containing micronutrients promote the health and milk output of dairy animals. Cattle suffer from a number of diseases. The diseases, besides causing death, reduce milk pr oduction. A healthy animal feeds regularly and has a nor mal postur e. The parasites of cattle may be both exter nal parasites and internal parasites. The external parasites live on the skin and mainly cause skin diseases. The inter nal parasites like worms, af fect stomach and intestine while flukes damage the liver . Infectious diseases are also caused by bacteria and viruses. Vaccinations ar e given to far m animals against many major viral and bacterial diseases. 12.2.2POULTRY FARMING Poultry farming is undertaken to raise domestic fowl for egg production and chicken meat. Therefore, improved poultry breeds are developed and far med to produce layers for eggs and broilers for meat. The cross-breeding programmes between Indian (indigenous, for example, Aseel) and foreign (exotic, for example, Leghorn) breeds for variety impr ovement ar e focused on to develop new varieties for the following desirable traits— (i) number and quality of chicks; Q Fig. 12.3: Indigenous milch breed of cattle

[Page 9]
SCIENCE148 (ii) dwarf broiler parent for commercial chick production; (iii) summer adaptation capacity/ tolerance to high temperature; (iv) low maintenance requirements; (v) reduction in the size of the egg-laying bird with ability to utilise mor e fibrous cheaper diets for mulated using agricultural by-products. The ration (daily food requirement) for broilers is protein rich with adequate fat. The level of vitamins A and K is kept high in the poultry feeds. Poultry fowl suf fer fr om a number of diseases caused by virus, bacteria, fungi, parasites, as well as fr om nutritional deficiencies. These necessitate pr oper cleaning, sanitation, and spraying of disinfectants at regular intervals. Appropriate vaccination can pr event the occurr ence of infectious diseases and reduce loss of poultry during an outbreak of disease. uestions 1. What management practices are common in dairy and poultry farming? 2. What are the differences between broilers and layers and in their management? Activity 12.4 • Visit a local poultry farm. Observe types of breeds and note the type of ration, housing and lighting facilities given to them. Identify the growers, layers and broilers. 12.2.3FISH PRODUCTION Fish is a cheap source of animal protein for our food. Fish production includes the finned true fish as well as shellfish such as prawns and molluscs. There are two ways of obtaining fish. One is from natural resources, which is called capture fishing. The other way is by fish farming, which is called culture fishery. The water source of the fish can be either seawater or fresh water, such as in rivers and ponds. Fishing can thus be done both by capture and cultur e of fish in marine and freshwater ecosystems. 12.2.3 (i) MARINE FISHERIES India’s marine fishery resources include 7500 km of coastline and the deep seas Fig. 12.4 Aseel Leghorn uestion 1. Discuss the implications of the following statement: “It is inter esting to note that poultry is India’s most ef ficient converter of low fibre food stuf f (which is unfit for human consumption) into highly nutritious animal protein food.” EGG AND BROILER PRODUCTION Broiler chickens ar e fed with vitamin-rich supplementary feed for good growth rate and better feed efficiency. Care is taken to avoid mortality and to maintain feathering and carcass quality. They are produced as broilers and sent to market for meat purposes. For good production of poultry birds, good management practices are important. These include maintenance of temperatur e and hygienic conditions in housing and poultry feed, as well as pr evention and contr ol of diseases and pests. The housing, nutritional and environmental requirements of br oilers are somewhat different from those of egg layers. Q Q

[Page 10]
IMPROVEMENT IN FOOD RESOURCES 149 beyond it. Popular marine fish varieties include pomphret, mackerel, tuna, sardines, and Bombay duck. Marine fish ar e caught using many kinds of fishing nets from fishing boats. Yields are increased by locating large schools of fish in the open sea using satellites and echo-sounders. Some marine fish of high economic value are also far med in seawater . This includes finned fishes like mullets, bhetki, and pearl spots, shellfish such as prawns (Fig. 12.5), mussels and oysters as well as seaweed. Oysters ar e also cultivated for the pearls they make. Macrobrachium rosenbergii (fresh water) Peneaus monodon (marine) Fig. 12.5 : Fresh water and marine prawns As marine fish stocks get further depleted, the demand for more fish can only be met by such cultur e fisheries, a practice called mariculture. 12.2.3 (ii) INLAND FISHERIES Fresh water resources include canals, ponds, reservoirs and rivers. Brackish water resour ces, where seawater and fr esh water mix together, such as estuaries and lagoons are also important fish r eservoirs. While capture fishing is also done in such inland water bodies, the yield is not high. Most fish production from these resources is thr ough aquaculture. Fish cultur e is sometimes done in combination with a rice crop, so that fish are grown in the water in the paddy field. Mor e intensive fish far ming can be done in composite fish cultur e systems. Both local and imported fish species ar e used in such systems. In such a system, a combination of five or six fish species is used in a single fishpond. These species ar e selected so that they do not compete for food among them having different types of food habits. As a result, the food available in all the parts of the pond is used. As Catlas are sur face feeders, Rohus feed in the middle-zone of the pond, Mrigals and Common Carps are bottom feeders, and Grass Carps feed on the weeds, together these species (Fig. 12.6) can use all the food in the pond without competing with each other. This increases the fish yield from the pond. (a) (b) (c) (d) Fig. 12.6: (a) Catla (b) Silver carp (c) Rohu (d) Grass Carp (e) Mrigal (f) Common Carp (e) (f) One problem with such composite fish culture is that many of these fish breed only during monsoon. Even if fish seed is collected from the wild, it can be mixed with that of other species as well. So, a major problem in fish farming is the lack of availability of good- quality seed. To overcome this problem, ways have now been worked out to breed these fish in ponds using hor monal stimulation. This has ensured the supply of pur e fish seed in desir ed quantities.