SCIENCE66 Fig. 6.9: Different types of epithelial tissues of skin). Simple squamous epithelial cells are extremely thin and flat and form a delicate lining. The oesophagus and the lining of the mouth are also covered with squamous epithelium. The skin, which protects the body, is also made of squamous epithelium. Skin epithelial cells are arranged in many layers to prevent wear and tear. Since they are arranged in a pattern of layers, the epithelium is called stratified squamous epithelium. Where absorption and secretion occur, as in the inner lining of the intestine, tall epithelial cells are present. This columnar (meaning ‘pillar-like’) epithelium facilitates movement across the epithelial barrier. In the respiratory tract, the columnar epithelial tissue also has cilia, which ar e hair-like projections on the outer surfaces of epithelial cells. These cilia can move, and their movement pushes the mucus forward to clear it. This type of epithelium is thus ciliated columnar epithelium. Cuboidal epithelium (with cube-shaped cells) forms the lining of kidney tubules and ducts of salivary glands, where it provides mechanical support. Epithelial cells often acquire additional specialisation as gland cells, which can secrete substances at the epithelial surface. Sometimes a portion of the epithelial tissue folds inward, and a multicellular gland is formed. This is glandular epithelium. 6.3.2 CONNECTIVE TISSUE Blood is a type of connective tissue. Why would it be called ‘connective’ tissue? A clue is provided in the introduction of this chapter! Now, let us look at this type of tissue in some more detail. The cells of connective tissue are loosely spaced and embedded in an intercellular matrix (Fig. 6.10). The matrix may be jelly like, fluid, dense or rigid. The nature of matrix differs in concordance with the function of the particular connective tissue. Activity 6.4 Take a drop of blood on a slide and observe different cells present in it under a microscope. of epithelium. This is called the simple squamous epithelium (squama means scale (a) Squamous (b) Stratified squamous (c) Cuboidal (d) Columnar (Ciliated) Reprint 2025-26
of epithelium. This is called the simple — of skin). Simple squamous epithelial cells are squamous epithelium (squama means scale — extremely thin and flat and form a delicate lining. The oesophagus and the lining of the a ee | mouth are also covered with squamous ae 7 we Pear epithelium. The skin, which protects the body, Pee a ea ge is also made of squamous epithelium. Skin ae To 9 _ a epithelial cells are arranged in many layers to fa) Squamous prevent wear and tear, Since they are arranged ina pattern of layers, the epithelium is called stratified squamous epithelium. : nd n _ “tt == gf Where absorption and secretion occur, as oe var a A in the inner lining of the intestine, tall epithelial ° wo Los cells are present. This columnar (meaning 7 os 2 ee ‘pillar-like’) epithelium facilitates movement ew. 5 nt Sate across the epithelial barrier. In the respiratory Soe ERT AGS tract, the columnar epithelial tissue also has Loe, 4 a pd 5 ‘lia. which are hair- ‘tions 8 ox ham sang: cilia, which are hair-like projec tions on the aa Nels “¥ eee GSA outer surfaces of epithelial cells. These cilia can ote Pi ae Br move, and their movement pushes the mucus rite Pepegen ss Sg forward to clear it. This type of epithelium is ee tat yaks Sy thus ciliated columnar epithelium. : eevee y ite {ip Cuboidal epithelium (with cube-shaped ws a 2) lo EY, cells) forms the lining of kidney tubules and ‘ — — ~ .e . 2 a ducts of salivary glands, where it provides Ib) Stratified squamous mechanical support. Epithelial cells often acquire additional specialisation as gland cells, — = — which can secrete substances at the epithelial a dea en A surface. Sometimes a portion of the epithelial a, of ae ee tissue folds inward, and a multicellular gland LF Ce Fe OF “ato is formed. This is glandular epithelium. pe a a a a, £2 ° ae hes? 2 fe ta ee aa 6.3.2 CONNECTIVE ‘TISSUE alae care antieiiert., ::o a ie oe iH Blood is a type of connective tissue. Why would ~ it be called ‘connective’ tissue? A clue is fe] Cubardal provided in the introduction of this chapter! Now. let us look at this type of tissue in some more detail. The cells of connective tissue are <<. loosely spaced and embedded in an awe te e a intercellular matrix (Fig. 6.10). The matrix may Pe) te sng dpe 8 7" . be jelly like, fluid, dense or rigid. The nature P "a ¥ : ghis of matrix differs in concordance with the carrer ca ot oae aes function of the particular connective tissue. &4 Sos t ead f : a . Activity 6.4 (a) Colunmar [Chated) e = =‘Take a drop of blood on a slide and observe different cells present in it Fig. 6.9: Different tvpes of epithelial tissues under a microscope. 66 Science. Reprint 2025-26