SCIENCE62 Cuticle Epidermis Collenchyma Parenchyma Phloem Vascular bundle Xylem Fig. 6.3: Section of a stem Cells of meristematic tissue are very active, they have dense cytoplasm, thin cellulose walls and prominent nuclei. They lack vacuoles. Can we think why they would lack vacuoles? (You might want to refer to the functions of vacuoles in the chapter on cells.) 6.2.2 PERMANENT TISSUE What happens to the cells formed by meristematic tissue? They take up a specific role and lose the ability to divide. As a result, they form a permanent tissue. This process of taking up a permanent shape, size, and a function is called differentiation. Differentiation leads to the development of various types of permanent tissues. 3. Can we think of reasons why there would be so many types of cells? • We can also try to cut sections of plant roots. We can even try cutting sections of root and stem of different plants. 6.2.2 (i) SIMPLE PERMANENT TISSUE A few layers of cells beneath the epidermis are generally simple permanent tissue. Parenchyma is the most common simple permanent tissue. It consists of relatively unspecialised cells with thin cell walls. They are living cells. They are usually loosely arranged, thus large spaces between cells (intercellular spaces) are found in this tissue (Fig. 6.4 a). This tissue generally stores food. Activity ______________ 6.2 • Take a plant stem and with the help of your teacher cut into very thin slices or sections. • Now, stain the slices with safranin. Place one neatly cut section on a slide, and put a drop of glycerine. • Cover with a cover -slip and observe under a micr oscope. Observe the various types of cells and their arrangement. Compare it with Fig. 6.3. • Now, answer the following on the basis of your observation: 1. Are all cells similar in structure? 2. How many types of cells can be seen? In some situations, it contains chlorophyll and performs photosynthesis, and then it is called chlorenchyma. In aquatic plants, large air cavities are present in parenchyma to help them float. Such a parenchyma type is called aerenchyma. The flexibility in plants is due to another permanent tissue, collenchyma. It allows bending of various parts of a plant like tendrils and stems of climbers without breaking. It also provides mechanical support. We can find this tissue in leaf stalks below the epidermis. The cells of this tissue are living, elongated and irregularly thickened at the corners. There is very little intercellular space (Fig. 6.4 b). Reprint 2025-26
Cells of meristematic tissue are very active. 3. Can we think of reasons why there they have dense cytoplasm. thin cellulose walls would be so many types of cells? and prominent nuclei. They lack vacuoles. Can ° We can also try to cut sections of plant we think why they would lack vacuoles? (You roots. We can even try cutting sections might want to refer to the functions of vacuoles of root and stem of different plants. in the chapter on cells.) . 6.2.2 (i) SIMPLE PERMANENT TISSUE 6.2.2 PERMANENT ‘TISSUE A few layers of cells beneath the epidermis are What happens to the cells formed by generally simple permanent tissue. meristematic tissue? They take up a specific Parenchyma is the most common simple role and lose the ability to divide. Asaresult, — Permanent tissue. It consists of relatively they form a permanent tissue. This process unspecialised cells with thin cell walls. They of taking up a permanent shape. size, and a re living cells. They are usually loosely function is called differentiation. Differentiation @7Tanged, thus large spaces between cells leads to the development of various types of (intercellular spaces) are found in this tissue permanent tissues. (Fig. 6.4a). This tissue generally stores food. Cuticle ie IT ——- = Epidernms wage: fisess se Ba ASN PAW, Won << Collenchynia See Tee eaees or | AS aejteo pes OS ee eA ees Ay ork Us oD ee Parenchyma Sy Ae DS [East SS” CON \\ waa whee CP <B Pm LPF EIR Lh OF aSe oem Loy Cs ET « e EO OA sa Uekelete ston Btecnicaes te Xylem re ST) Vascular bundle ¥ “ Ma ~ Fig. 6.3: Section of a stein SA Activity 6.2 In some situations, it contains chlorophyll and . performs photosynthesis, and then it is called * Take a plant stem and with the help chlorenchyma. In aquatic plants, large air of your teacher cut into very thin slices cavities are present in parenchyma to help or sections. them float. Such a parenchyma type is called . Now, stain the slices with safranin. aerenchyma. Place one neatly cut section on a slide, The flexibility in plants is due to another and put a drop of glycerine. permanent tissue. collenchyma. It allows * Cover with a cover-slip and observe bending of various parts ofa plant like tendrils under a microscope. Observe the and stems of climbers without breaking. It various types of cells and their also provides mechanical support. We can find art angement. Compare it with Fig. 6.3. this tissue in leaf stalks below the epidermis. . Now, answer the following on the ay basis of your observation: The cells of this Ussue are living, elongated 1. Are all cells similar in structure? and irregularly thickened at the 2. How many types of cells can corners. There is very little intercellular space be seen? | {Fig. 6.4 b). 62 Science. Reprint 2025-26