SCIENCE70 • The different types of connective tissues in our body include areolar tissue, adipose tissue, bone, tendon, ligament, cartilage and blood. • Striated, unstriated and cardiac are three types of muscle tissues. • Nervous tissue is made of neurons that receive and conduct impulses. Exercises 1. Define the term “tissue”. 2. How many types of elements together make up the xylem tissue? Name them. 3. How are simple tissues different from complex tissues in plants? 4. Differentiate between parenchyma, collenchyma and sclerenchyma on the basis of their cell wall. 5. What are the functions of the stomata? 6. Diagrammatically show the difference between the three types of muscle fibres. 7. What is the specific function of the cardiac muscle? 8. Differentiate between striated, unstriated and cardiac muscles on the basis of their structure and site/location in the body. 9. Draw a labelled diagram of a neuron. 10. Name the following. (a) Tissue that for ms the inner lining of our mouth. (b) Tissue that connects muscle to bone in humans. (c) Tissue that transports food in plants. (d) Tissue that stor es fat in our body. (e) Connective tissue with a fluid matrix. (f) Tissue pr esent in the brain. 11. Identify the type of tissue in the following: skin, bark of tree, bone, lining of kidney tubule, vascular bundle. Reprint 2025-26
° The different types of connective tissues in our body include areolar tissue, adipose tissue, bone, tendon, ligament, cartilage and blood. 3 Striated, unstriated and cardiac are three types of muscle tissucs. ° Nervous tissue is made of neurons that receive and conduct impulses. . | __s—d)sé&Exerrcises a “s 1. Define the term “tissue”. | ve ae 2. How many types of clements together make up the xylem SS tissue? Name them. “a 3. How are simple tissues different from complex tissues in plants? 4. Differentiate between parenchyma, collenchyma and sclerenchyma on the basis of their cell wall. 5. What are the functions of the stomata? 6. Diagrammatically show the difference between the three types of muscle fibres. 7. What is the specific function of the cardiac muscle? 8. Differentiate between striated, unstriated and cardiac muscles on the basis of their structure and site/location in the body. 9. Draw a labelled diagram of a neuron. 10. Name the following. (a) Tissue that forms the inner lining of our mouth. (b) Tissue that connects muscle to bone in humans. (ec) Tissue that transports food in plants. {d) Tissue that stores fat in our body. (e) Connective tissue with a fluid matrix. (f) Tissue present in the brain. 11. Identify the type of tissue in the following: skin, bark of tree, bone, lining of kidney tubule, vascular bundle. 70 Sewer, : Reprint 2025-26