Lateral meristem uestions 1. What is a tissue? 2. What is the utility of tissues in multi-cellular organisms? 6.2 Plant Tissues 6.2.1 MERISTEMATIC TISSUE • From the above observations, answer the following questions: 1. Which of the two onions has longer roots? Why? 2. Do the roots continue growing even after we have removed their tips? 3. Why would the tips stop growing in jar 2 after we cut them? The growth of plants occurs only in certain specific regions. This is because the dividing tissue, also known as meristematic tissue, is located only at these points. Depending on the r egion where they are pr esent, meristematic tissues are classified as apical, lateral and inter calary (Fig. 6.2). New cells produced by meristem are initially like those of meristem itself, but as they grow and mature, their characteristics slowly change and they become differentiated as components of other tissues. Fig. 6.1: Growth of roots in onion bulbs Activity ______________ 6.1 • Take two glass jars and fill them with water. • Now, take two onion bulbs and place one on each jar , as shown in Fig. 6.1. • Observe the growth of roots in both the bulbs for a few days. • Measure the length of roots on day 1, 2 and 3. • On day 4, cut the root tips of the onion bulb in jar 2 by about 1 cm. After this, observe the growth of roots in both the jars and measur e their lengths each day for five more days and record the observations in tables, like the table below: Length Day 1 Day 2 Day 3 Day 4 Day 5 Jar 1 Jar 2 Q Apical meristem is present at the growing tips of stems and roots and increases the length of the stem and the root. The girth of the stem or root increases due to lateral meristem (cambium). Intercalary meristem seen in some plants is located near the node. Fig. 6.2: Location of meristematic tissue in plant body Jar 1 Jar 2 TISSUES 61 Apical meristem Intercalary meristem Reprint 2025-26
beha : . From the above observations, answer M we sl ONS the following questions: fh. Whatis a dssuc? 1. Which of the two onions has longer | 20 What is the utility of dssucs in roots? Why? | mnulti-celular organisms? 2. Do the roots continue growing even after we have removed their a tips? 3. Why would the tips stop growing 6.2 Plant Tissues in jar 2 after we cut then? The growth of plants occurs only in certain 6.2.1 MERISTEMATIC TISSUE, specific regions. This is because the dividing tissue. also known as meristematic tissue, is , " located only at these points. Depending on EN AN the region where they are present, i. i. . meristematic tissues are classified as apical, Te, Rene 2) lateral and intercalary (Fig. 6.2). New cells ~~ Ae WH produced by meristem are initially like those of meristem itself, but as they grow and mature, their characteristics slowly change and they become differentiated as components of other Ussues. ——$[— Apical meristem 0 Jar] Jar 2 uy Fig. 6.1: Growth of roots in onion bulbs . —_ Interealary menstem Activity 6.1 “ . Take two glass jars and fill them with water. . Now, take two onion bulbs and place one on each jar, as shown in Fig. 6.1. . Observe the growth of roots in both the bulbs for a few days. ° Measure the length of roots on day 1, 2 and 3. ° On day 4. cut the root tips of the onion bulb in jar 2 by about 1 cm. After this, Lateral meristem observe the growth of roots in both the jars and measure their lengths each day for five more days and record the . observations in tables, like the table Fig. 6.2: Location of ineristematic tissue in plant body below: Apical meristem is present at the growing tips of stems and roots and increases the length of the stem and the root. The girth of the stem or root increases due to lateral meristem (cambium). Intercalary meristem seen in some plants is located near the node. Tisst eS 61 Reprint 2025-26 :