TISSUES 65 uestions 1. Name types of simple tissues. 2. Where is apical meristem found? 3. Which tissue makes up the husk of coconut? 4. What are the constituents of phloem? 6.3 Animal Tissues When we breathe we can actually feel the movement of our chest. How do these body parts move? For this we have specialised cells called muscle cells (Fig. 6.8). The contraction and relaxation of these cells result in movement. Q Fig. 6.8: Location of muscle fibres Smooth muscle fibres Smooth muscle fibre (Cell) Nucleus During breathing we inhale oxygen. Where does this oxygen go? It is absorbed in the lungs and then is transported to all the body cells through blood. Why would cells need oxygen? The functions of mitochondria we studied earlier provide a clue to this question. Blood flows and carries various substances from one part of the body to the other. For example, it carries oxygen and food to all cells. It also collects wastes from all parts of the body and carries them to the liver and kidney for disposal. Blood and muscles are both examples of tissues found in our body. On the basis of the functions they perform we can think of different types of animal tissues, such as epithelial tissue, connective tissue, muscular tissue and nervous tissue. Blood is a type of connective tissue, and muscle forms muscular tissue. 6.3.1 EPITHELIAL TISSUE The covering or protective tissues in the animal body are epithelial tissues. Epithelium covers most organs and cavities within the body. It also forms a barrier to keep different body systems separate. The skin, the lining of the mouth, the lining of blood vessels, lung alveoli and kidney tubules are all made of epithelial tissue. Epithelial tissue cells are tightly packed and form a continuous sheet. They have only a small amount of cementing material between them and almost no intercellular spaces. Obviously, anything entering or leaving the body must cross at least one layer of epithelium. As a result, the permeability of the cells of various epithelia play an important role in regulating the exchange of materials between the body and the external environment and also between different parts of the body. Regardless of the type, all epithelium is usually separated from the underlying tissue by an extracellular fibrous basement membrane. Different epithelia (Fig. 6.9) show differing structures that correlate with their unique functions. For example, in cells lining blood vessels or lung alveoli, where transportation of substances occurs through a selectively permeable surface, there is a simple flat kind Reprint 2025-26
(" westious During breathing we inhale oxygen. Where | re Se does this oxygen go? It is absorbed in the lungs ) 2. Name wpes of simple tissues, and then is transported to all the body cells 2. Where is apical meristem found? through blood. Why would cells need oxygen? 3 Which dssue makes up tic husk The functions of mitochondria we studied | of coconut? , earlier provide a clue to this question. Blood UJ 4. What are the constituents of flows and carries various substances from one phioen? part of the body to the other. For example. it carries oxygen and food to all cells. It also . . collects wastes from all parts of the body and 6.3 Animal Tissues carries them to the liver and kidney for disposal. When we breathe we can actually feel the Blood and muscles are both examples of movement of our chest. How do these body tissues found in our body. On the basis of the parts move? For this we have specialised cells g netions they perform we can think of different called muscle cells (Fig. 6.8). The contraction types of animal tissues, such as epithelial and relaxation of these cells result tissue, connective tissue, muscular tissue and in movement. nervous tissue. Blood is a type of connective em tissue, and muscle forms muscular tissue. Stomach 6.3.1 EPrrHELIAL TISSUE. et, The covering or protective tissues in the animal £ Pe body are epithelial tissues. Epithelium covers : we es most organs and cavities within the body. It ore. ae also forms a barrier to keep different body systems separate. The skin, the lining of the mouth, the lining of blood vessels, lung alveoli beg and kidney tubules are all made of epithelial MSG age sate tissue. Epithelial tissue cells are tightly packed . aioe and form a continuous sheet. They have only . es asmall amount of cementing material between ot ee, “AS, pea them and almost no intercellular spaces. f Obviously, anything entering or leaving the oe 1 body must cross at least one layer of es rs epithelium. As a result, the permeability of the eee g cells of various epithelia play an important role re en in regulating the exchange of materials ge ee ne between the body and the external in ee ene: “3 environment and also between different parts eee of the body. Regardless of the type. all Smooth musele bres epithelium is usually separated from the underlying tissue by an extracellular fibrous basement membrane. Nucleus Different epithelia (Fig. 6.9) show differing Stoath muscle fre structures that correlate with their unique - . functions. For example, in cells lining blood ee (eel vessels or lung alveoli, where transportation of substances occurs through a selectively Fig. 6.8: Location of muscle Nbres permeable surface, there is a simple flat kind Tisst 6 65 Reprint 2025-26 :