SCIENCE64 Recall which gas is required for photosynthesis. Find out the role of transpiration in plants. Epidermal cells of the roots, whose function is water absorption, commonly bear long hair- like parts that greatly increase the total absorptive surface area. In some plants like desert plants, epidermis has a thick waxy coating of cutin (chemical substance with waterproof quality) on its outer surface. Can we think of a reason for this? Is the outer layer of a branch of a tr ee different from the outer layer of a young stem? As plants grow older, the outer protective tissue undergoes certain changes. A strip of secondary meristem located in the cortex forms layers of cells which constitute the cork. Cells of cork are dead and compactly arranged without intercellular spaces (Fig. 6.6). They also have a substance called suberin in their walls that makes them impervious to gases and water. is a distinctive feature of the complex plants, one that has made possible their survival in the terrestrial environment. In Fig. 6.3 showing a section of stem, can you see different types of cells in the vascular bundle? Xylem consists of tracheids, vessels, xylem parenchyma (Fig. 6.7 a,b,c) and xylem fibres. Tracheids and vessels have thick walls, and many are dead cells when matur e. Tracheids and vessels are tubular structures. This allows them to transport water and minerals vertically. The parenchyma stores food. Xylem fibres are mainly supportive in function. Phloem is made up of five types of cells: sieve cells, sieve tubes, companion cells, phloem fibres and the phloem parenchyma [Fig. 6.7 (d)]. Sieve tubes are tubular cells with perforated walls. Phloem transports food from leaves to other parts of the plant. Except phloem fibres, other phloem cells are living cells. 6.2.2 (ii) COMPLEX PERMANENT TISSUE The different types of tissues we have discussed until now are all made of one type of cells, which look like each other. Such tissues are called simple permanent tissue. Yet another type of permanent tissue is complex tissue. Complex tissues are made of more than one type of cells. All these cells coordinate to perform a common function. Xylem and phloem are examples of such complex tissues. They are both conducting tissues and constitute a vascular bundle. Vascular tissue Fig. 6.6: Protective tissue Cork cells Ruptured epidermis Nucleus Cytoplasm Pits Pit (a) Tracheid (b) Vessel (c) Xylem parenchyma Fig. 6.7: Types of complex tissue Sieve plate Sieve tube Phloem parenchyma Companion cell (d) Section of phloem Reprint 2025-26
Recall which gas is required for isa aieuinetive reanure one complex Plants. photosynthesis. one | a as made possible t rei sure va n Find out the role of transpiration tn plants. the terrestrial environment. Int ig. 6.3 showing a section of stem, can you see different types Epidermal cells of the roots, whose function of cells in the vascular bundle’? is water absorption, commonly bear long hair- Xylem consists of tracheids, vessels, xylem like parts that greatly increase the total parenchyma (Fig. 6.7 a,b.c) and xylem fibres. absorptive surface area. Tracheids and vessels have thick walls, and In some plants like desert plants, many are dead cells when mature. Tracheids epidermis has a thick waxy coating of cutin and vessels are tubular structures. This allows (chemical substance with waterproof quality) — them to transport water and minerals on its outer surface. Can we think ofa reason vertically. The parenchyma stores food. Xylem for this? ; fibres are mainly supportive in function. Is the outer layer of a branch of a tree Phloem is made up of five types of cells: different from the outer layer ofa young stem? — gieve cells. sieve tubes. companion cells, As plants grow older, the outer protective phloem fibres and the phloem parenchyma lssue undergoes certain changes. A strip of (Fig. 6.7 (d)]. Sieve tubes are tubular cells with secondary meristem located in the cortex forms perforated walls. Phloem transports food from layers of cells whieh constitute mn cork. cells leaves to other parts of the plant. Except of cork are dead and compactly arranged phloem fibres. other phloem cells are living cells. without intercellular spaces (Fig. 6.6). They ° also have a substance called suberin in their Z ry ® KS i walls that makes them impervious to gases e RES HT ‘1 and water. bart Se | tpl Sucteus Cork cells Ruptured epidermis ~~ 298 | ot = : ! Og ae a ne 3|| feeeal aE? sits agp ED SD LJ - ® ‘eens - Ais oo an WY Bs a ei] keen 1 ne 6 We cies aaa a ee a e eet | a ee omg, ol: a niece, i gf -feyteplesn SD ES ® Teeead cae egy aut Gia wip @ eet ano mat On Qe SD ny ail ot GD Hee : Xn tee ~ —e a ae — CY Jatiatete > Se ee ee ee ee oa : Fig. 6.6: Protective tissue (a) ‘Tracheid (hb) Vessel (c) Xylem parenehytis 6.2.2 (ii) ComMPLEX PERMANENT TISSUE Bo TE Seve plate The different types of tissues we have discussed Steve tube until now are all made of one type of cells. a o” which look like each other. Such tissues are — pinoetn called simple permanent tissue. Yet another . 3 parenchyma type of permanent tissue is complex tissue. - Complex tissues are made of more than one 7 Campanton cell type of cells. All these cells coordinate to o perform a common function. Xylem and : phloem are examples of such complex tissues. ., : They are both conducting tissues and (a] Section of phlaem constitute a vascular bundle. Vascular tissue Fig. 6.7: [vpes of complex tissue 64 Science. Reprint 2025-26