TISSUES 63 Fig. 6.4: Various types of simple tissues: (a) Parenchyma (b) Collenchyma (c) Sclerenchyma (i) transverse section, (ii) longitudinal section. Yet another type of per manent tissue is sclerenchyma. It is the tissue which makes the plant hard and stiff. We have seen the husk of a coconut. It is made of sclerenchymatous tissue. The cells of this tissue are dead. They are long and narrow as the walls are thickened due to lignin. Often these walls are so thick that there is no internal space inside the cell (Fig. 6.4 c). This tissue is present in stems, around vascular bundles, in the veins of leaves and in the hard covering of seeds and nuts. It provides strength to the plant parts. Activity ______________ 6.3 • Take a freshly plucked leaf of Rhoeo. • Stretch and break it by applying pressure. • While breaking it, keep it stretched gently so that some peel or skin projects out from the cut. • Remove this peel and put it in a petri dish filled with water . • Add a few drops of safranin. • Wait for a couple of minutes and then transfer it onto a slide. Gently place a cover slip over it. • Observe under microscope. What you observe is the outermost layer of cells, called epidermis. The epidermis is usually made of a single layer of cells. In some plants living in very dry habitats, the epidermis may be thicker since protection against water loss is critical. The entire surface of a plant has an outer covering epidermis. It protects all the parts of the plant. Epidermal cells on the aerial a Intercellular spaces b Wall thickenings Nucleus Vacuole Cell wall Narrow lumen Lignified thick wall c (ii) c (i) Thick lignified walls Fig. 6.5: Guard cells and epidermal cells: (a) lateral view, (b) surface view (a) (b) Guard cell Stoma Epidermal cell Guard cells parts of the plant often secrete a waxy, water- resistant layer on their outer surface. This aids in protection against loss of water, mechanical injury and invasion by parasitic fungi. Since it has a protective role to play, cells of epidermal tissue form a continuous layer without intercellular spaces. Most epidermal cells are relatively flat. Often their outer and side walls are thicker than the inner wall. We can observe small por es her e and there in the epidermis of the leaf. These pores are called stomata (Fig. 6.5). Stomata are enclosed by two kidney-shaped cells called guard cells. They are necessary for exchanging gases with the atmosphere. Transpiration (loss of water in the for m of water vapour) also takes place through stomata. Reprint 2025-26
Intercellular spaces a Wall thickenings A r= _—e Thick lignilied \ . a ‘acuolr walls i arrow lume a SS TE thick wall Oar : al ge PS \ Ww ~ i) \ a b el cw) Fig. 6.4: Various types of simple lissties: {a} Parenchyina (b} Collenchyina (c} Sclerenchyina (i) iransverse section, Gi) longitudinal section. Yet another type of permanent tissue is io sclerenchyma. It is the tissue which makes the eo plant hard and stiff. We have seen the husk of re a coconut. It is made of sclerenchymatous vr tissue. The cells of this tissue are dead. They le are long and narrow as the walls are thickened eo Guard SO \ oy 2 due to lignin. Often these walls are so thick Ce cells cals ™S} oO that there is no internal space inside the cell ~ LS Ne Stoma (Fig, 6.4 ¢). This tissue is present in stems, ae SG ——_ : —¢ Epidermal a around vascular bundles, in the veins of leaves i cell 7: } e., and in the hard covering of seeds and nuts. It . Ae Guard provides strength to the plant parts. (a) () Activity 6.3 Fig. 6.5: Guard cells and epidermat cells: (a} lateral ¢ ‘Take a freshly plucked leaf of Rhoco. View, (b} surface view . Stretch and break it by applying pressure. parts of the plant often secrete a waxy. water - ° While breaking it. keep it stretched resistant layer on their outer surface. This aids gently so that some peel or skin in protection against loss of water, mechanical projects out from the cut. i and invasi by parasitic f 44. Sine ¢ Remove this peel and put it in a petri njury and invasion by parasitic hingt. Since dish filled with water. it has a protective role to play, cells of * Add a tew drops of safranin. epidermal tissue form a continuous layer ¢ Wait for a couple of minutes and then without intercellular spaces. Most epidermal transfer it onto a slide. Gently place cells are relatively flat. Often their outer and a cover slip over it. side walls are thicker than the inner wall. ¢ Observe under microscope. We can observe small pores here and What you observe is the outermost layer _ there in the epidermis of the leaf. These pores of cells, called epidermis. The epidermis is are called stomata (Fig. 6.5). Stomata are usually made ofa single layer of cells. Insome enclosed by two kidney-shaped cells plants living in very dry habitats, the epidermis called guard cells. They are necessary for may be thicker since protection against water exchanging gases with the atmosphere. loss is critical. The entire surface ofa planthas — Transpiration (loss of water in the form of an outer covering epidermis. It protects allthe Water vapour) also” takes — place parts of the plant. Epidermal cells on the aerial through stomata. Tisst eS 63 Reprint 2025-26 :