SCIENCE68 [Fig. 6.11(a)]. These muscles are also called skeletal muscles as they are mostly attached to bones and help in body movement. Under the microscope, these muscles show alternate light and dark bands or striations when stained appropriately. As a r esult, they ar e also called striated muscles. The cells of this tissue are long, cylindrical, unbranched and multinucleate (having many nuclei). The movement of food in the alimentary canal or the contraction and relaxation of blood vessels are involuntary movements. We cannot really start them or stop them simply by wanting to do so! Smooth muscles [Fig. 6.11(b)] or involuntary muscles control such movements. They are also found in the iris of the eye, in ureters and in the bronchi of the lungs. The cells are long with pointed ends (spindle-shaped) and uninucleate (having a single nucleus). They are also called unstriated muscles – why would they be called that? The muscles of the heart show rhythmic contraction and relaxation throughout life. These involuntary muscles are called cardiac muscles [Fig. 6.11(c)]. Heart muscle cells are cylindrical, branched and uninucleate. Activity 6.5 Compare the structures of different types of muscular tissues. Note down their shape, number of nuclei and position of nuclei within the cell in the Table 6.1. Table 6.1: Features Striated Smooth Cardiac Shape Number of nuclei Position of nuclei 6.3.4 NERVOUS TISSUE All cells possess the ability to respond to stimuli. However, cells of the nervous tissue are highly specialised for being stimulated and Muscles contain special proteins called contractile proteins, which contract and relax to cause movement. Fig. 6.11: Types of muscles fibres: (a) striated muscle, (b) smooth muscle, (c) cardiac muscle We can move some muscles by conscious will. Muscles present in our limbs move when we want them to, and stop when we so decide. Such muscles are called voluntary muscles (c) Striations Nuclei Spindle shaped muscle cell Nucleus (b) Nuclei Striations (a) Reprint 2025-26
Muscles contain special proteins called (Fig. 6.11 (a)]. These muscles are also called contractile proteins, which contract and relax — skeletal muscles as they are mostly attached to cause Movement. to bones and help in body movement. Under Suter the microscope, these muscles show alternate - light and dark bands or striations when Ney /\ Strations stained appropriately. As a result, they are er ey eke Lp also called striated muscles. The cells of this ade he Dipsgeht te tissue are long, cylindrical, unbranched and ~ ee + multinucleate (having many nuclei). @ The movement of food in the alimentary canal or the contraction and relaxation of blood Spindle shaped vessels are involuntary movements. We cannot muscle celta really start them or stop them simply by may De... _—_ ee ee wanting to do so! Smooth muscles [Fig. ———— = = Sey esa E- 6.1 1{b)] or involuntary muscles control such a —— ——— movements. They are also found in the iris of eg SSS the eye, in ureters and in the bronchi of the re —_ ————— lungs. The cells are long with pointed ends = RD ae (spindle-shaped) and uninucleate (having a note SES So . Sa SS See 2 single nucleus). They are also called unstriated —= — ey wuek muscles - why would they be called that? nelens a ae The muscles of the heart show rhythmic ©) contraction and relaxation throughout life. These involuntary muscles are called cardiac ae muscles (Fig. 6.1 1(c)]. Heart muscle cells are aay cea TELE, eee cylindrical, branched and uninucleate. eal Bld geet Striations oe cB ae Activity 6.5 Bee Gece er ics ~ 3 gS Sit 9a Sie ee Pega kg pe Hg = Compare the structures of different pve Saat Ned gee types of muscular tissues, Note down ic, FAR ta Ghee el their shape, number of nuclei and Secs RAs geemeiey > Sle osition of nuclei within the cell in Sah See BS ae the Table 6.1. ee ce ed Ba Rad cal feet hora Table 6.1: core pate a8 SR Features Striated | Smooth | Cardiac ee Gel pes per Shar aes Gaal Number of nuclei ©) Position of nuclei Fig. 6.11: Types oftiiscles fibres: fa] strated muscle, ()} stnooth imiscle, (cf cardiac muscle 6.3.4 NERVOUS TISSUE We can move some muscles by conscious will. Muscles present in our limbs move when All cells possess the ability to respond to we want them to, and stop when we so decide. — stimuli. However, cells of the nervous tissue Such muscles are called voluntary muscles are highly specialised for being stimulated and 68 Science. Reprint 2025-26