IMPROVEMENT IN FOOD RESOURCES 151 with a maximum input of organic manures, recyled farm wastes, and bio-agents, with healthy cropping systems. • Mixed farming is a system of farming on a particular farm which includes crop production, raising of livestock etc. • Mixed cropping is growing of two or more crops simultaneously on the same piece of land. • Growing two or mor e crops in definite row patterns is known as inter - cropping. • The growing of different crops on a piece of land in pre-planned succession is called crop rotation. • Varietal improvement is r equired for higher yield, good quality, biotic and abiotic resistance, shortening the maturity duration, wider adaptability and desirable agronomic characteristics. • Farm animals r equire pr oper car e and management such as shelter , feeding, breeding and disease control. This is called animal husbandry. • Poultry farming is done to raise domestic fowls. Poultry production includes egg production and broiler production for poultry meat. • To enhance poultry production, cross breeding is done between Indian and exotic breeds for variety improvement. • Fish may be obtained from marine resources as well as inland resources. • To increase production of fish, they can be cultured in marine and inland ecosystems. • Marine fish capture is done by fishing nets guided by echo-sounders and satellites. • Composite fish culture system is commonly used for fish farming. • Bee-keeping is done to get honey and wax. Exercises 1. Explain any one method of crop production which ensures high yield. 2. Why are manure and fertilizers used in fields? 3. What are the advantages of inter -cropping and cr op rotation? 4. What is genetic manipulation? How is it useful in agricultural practices? 5. How do storage grain losses occur? 6. How do good animal husbandry practices benefit farmers? 7. What are the benefits of cattle farming? 8. For increasing production, what is common in poultry, fisheries and bee-keeping? 9. How do you differentiate between capture fishing, mariculture and aquaculture? Reprint 2025-26
with a maximum input of organic manures, recyled farm wastes, and bio-agents, with healthy cropping systems. ° Mixed farming is a system of farming on a particular farm which includes crop production, raising of livestock ete. ° Mixed cropping is growing of two or more crops simultaneously on the same piece of land. ° Growing two or more crops in definite row patterns is known as inter- cropping. ° The growing of different crops on a piece of land in pre-planned succession is called crop rotation. ° Varictal improvement is required for higher yield, good quality, biotic and abiotic resistanee, shortening the maturity duration, wider adaptability and desirable agronomic characteristics. ° Farm animals require proper care and management such as shelter, feeding, breeding and disease control. This is called animal hushandry. ° Poultry farming is done to raise domestic fowls. Poultry production includes egg production and broiler production for poultry meat. ° To enhance poultry production, cross breeding is done between Indian and exotic breeds for variety improvement. ° Fish may be obtained from marine resources as well as inland resources. ° To increase production of fish, they can be cultured in marine and inland ecosystems. ° Marine fish capture is done by fishing nets guided by echo-sounders and satellites. e Composite fish culture system is commonly used for fish farming. ° Bee-keeping is done to get honey and wax. . Exercises C.ti‘C;SC~*”r 1. Explain any one method of crop production which ensures high yield. 2. Why are manure and fertilizers used in fields’? ry i 3. What are the advantages of inter-cropping and crop rotation? ! LS; 4. What is genetic manipulation? How is it useful in agricultural practices? > P 5. How do storage grain losses occur? 7 6. How do good animal hushandry practices benefit farmers? SN 7. What are the benefits of cattle farming? 8. For increasing production, what is common in poultry, fisheries and bee-keeping? 9. How do you differentiate between capture fishing, mariculture and aquaculture? Iaracneaent is Foon Resor wees 151 Reprint 2025-26 :