IMPROVEMENT IN FOOD RESOURCES 145 145145145145 Inter-cropping is growing two or more crops simultaneously on the same field in a definite pattern (Fig.12.2). A few rows of one crop alternate with a few rows of a second crop, for example, soyabean + maize, or finger millet (bajra) + cowpea (lobia). The crops are selected such that their nutrient requirements are dif ferent. This ensures maximum utilisation of the nutrients supplied, and also prevents pests and diseases from spreading to all the plants belonging to one crop in a field. This way , both crops can give better returns. ( gokhroo), Parthenium (gajar ghas), Cyperus rotundus ( motha). They compete for food, space and light. Weeds take up nutrients and reduce the growth of the crop. Therefore, removal of weeds from cultivated fields during the early stages of crop growth is essential for a good harvest. Generally insect pests attack the plants in three ways: (i) they cut the root, stem and leaf, (ii) they suck the cell sap from various parts of the plant, and (iii) they bore into stem and fruits. They thus affect the health of the crop and reduce yields. Diseases in plants are caused by pathogens such as bacteria, fungi and viruses. These pathogens can be present in and transmitted through the soil, water and air. Weeds, insects and diseases can be controlled by various methods. O ne of the most commonly used methods is the use of pesticides, which include herbicides, insecticides and fungicides. These chemicals are sprayed on crop plants or used for treating seeds and soil. H owever, excessive use of these chemicals creates problems, since they can be poisonous to many plant and animal species and cause environmental pollution. Weed control methods also include mechanical removal. Preventive methods such as proper seed bed preparation, timely sowing of crops, intercropping and crop rotation also help in weed control. Some other preventive measures against pests are the use of resistant varieties, and summer ploughing, in which fields are ploughed deep in summers to destroy weeds and pests. uestion 1. Which of the following conditions will give the most benefits? Why? (a) Farmers use high-quality seeds, do not adopt irrigation or use fertilizers. (b) Farmers use ordinary seeds, adopt irrigation and use fertilizer. (c) Farmers use quality seeds, adopt irrigation, use fertilizer and use crop protection measures. Q Fig. 12.2 :Fig. 12.2 :Fig. 12.2 :Fig. 12.2 :Fig. 12.2 : Intercropping The growing of different crops on a piece of land in a pre-planned succession is known as crop rotation. Depending upon the duration, crop rotation is done for dif ferent crop combinations. The availability of moisture and irrigation facilities decide the choice of the crop to be cultivated after one harvest. If crop rotation is done properly then two or three crops can be grown in a year with good harvests. 12.1.3CROP PROTECTION MANAGEMENT Field crops are infested by a large number of weeds, insect pests and diseases. If weeds and pests are not controlled at the appropriate time then they can damage the crops so much that most of the crop is lost. Weeds are unwanted plants in the cultivated field, for example, Xanthium Reprint 2025-26
Intercropping is growing two or more — (gokhroo), Parthenium (gajar ghas), Cyperus crops simultaneously on the same field ina rotundus (motha). They compete for food, definite pattem (Fig.12.2). A few rows ofone — space and light. Weeds take up nutrients and crop alternate with a few rows of a second — reduce the growth of the crop. Therefore, crop, for example, soyabean + maize, or finger removal of weeds from cultivated fields during millet (bajra) + cowpea (lobia). The crops are the carly stages of crop growth is essential for selected such that their) nutrient a good harvest. requirements are different. This ensures Generally insect pests attack the plants maximum utilisation of the nutrients — in three ways: (i) they cut the root, stem and supplied, and also prevents pests and — leaf, (ii) they suck the cell sap from various diseases from spreading to all the plants — parts ofthe plant, and (fii) they bore into stem belonging to one crop in a field. This way. and fruits. They thus affect the health of the both crops can give better returns. crop and reduce yields. - Diseases in plants are caused by OKs DRE SRG. - pathogens such as bacteria, fungi and vinises. es el OS FEQD These pathogens can be present in and OLE CEQ eae) transmitted through the soil, water and air. SS Re Bes Weeds, insects and diseases can be 4 . PN NA Se controlled by various methods. One of the &. 3, & & & & ¢ most commonly used methads is the use of esd fp fo SBS. pesticides, which include herbicides, ABE OPI BAS ORD BOD BF insecticides and fungicides. These chemicals “ Ss & & x g & are sprayed on crop plants or used for treating he a opm RD oe WO seeds and soil. However, excessive use of 4 Dee yee 2 these chemicals creates problems, since they Cp Reraaty EER can be poisonous to many plant and animal OF OOO PER BEN OO, species and cause environmental pollution. KaKeS AN wie Weed control methods also include mechanical removal. Preventive methods Fig. 12.2 : Intercropping such as proper seed bed preparation, timely sowing of crops. intercropping and crop The growing of different crops on a piece rotation also help in weed control. Some other of land ina pre-planned succession is known preventive measures against pests are the use as crop rotation. Depending upon the — ofresistant varieties, and surnmer ploughing, duration, crop rotation is done for different in which fields are ploughed deep in sutnmers crop combinations. The availability of moisture to destroy weeds and pests. and irrigation facilities decide the choice of the crop to be cultivated after one harvest. If crop (" weshion rotation is done properly then two or three i |i ne . . — crops can be grown in a year with 1. Which of the following conditions good harvests. ° | wil give the most benefits? Whve ° (a) Farmers use high quality 12.1.3 CROP PROTECTION MANAGEMENT seeds, do net adopt irrigation or use fertilizers. Field crops are infested by a large number of MK (b}) Farmers use ordinary weeds, insect pests and diseases. If weeds and seeds, adopt irrigation and pests are not controlled at the appropriate use fertilizer. time then they can damage the crops so much (Farmers use quality seeds. that most of the crop is lost. adopt irrigation, use Weeds are unwanted plants in the fertilizer and use crop cultivated field, for example, Xanthium Protecuon mcasures, Ivprovesenr iv Foon ResoeRCES 145 Reprint 2025-26 :