IMPROVEMENT IN FOOD RESOURCES 143 143143143143 our environment from excessive use of fertilizers. Using biological waste material is also a way of recycling farm waste. Based on the kind of biological material used, manure can be classified as: (i) Compost and vermi-compost: The process in which farm waste material like livestock excreta (cow dung, etc.), vegetable waste, animal r efuse, domestic waste, sewage waste, straw, eradicated weeds etc. is decomposed in pits is known as composting. The compost is rich in organic matter and nutrients. Compost is also pr epar ed by using earthwor ms to hasten the process of decomposition of plant and animal refuse. This is called vermi-compost. (ii) Green manure: Prior to the sowing of the crop seeds, some plants like sun hemp or guar ar e gr own and then mulched by ploughing them into the soil. These green plants thus turn into gr een manure which helps in enriching the soil in nitrogen and phosphorus. FERTILIZERS Fertilizers are commercially produced plant nutrients. Fertilizers supply nitr ogen, phosphorus and potassium. They ar e used to ensur e good vegetative gr owth (leaves, branches and flowers), giving rise to healthy plants. Fertilizers are a factor in the higher yields of high-cost farming. Fertilizers should be applied carefully in terms of proper dose, time, and observing pre- and post-application pr ecautions for their complete utilisation. For example, sometimes fertilizers get washed away due to excessive irrigation and are not fully absorbed by the plants. This excess fertilizer then leads to water pollution. Also, as we have seen in the previous class, continuous use of fertilizers in an area can destroy soil fertility because the organic matter in the soil is not replenished and micro-organisms in the soil are harmed by the fertilizers used. Short-term benefits of using fertilizers and long-term benefits of using Deficiency of these nutrients affects physiological processes in plants including reproduction, growth and susceptibility to diseases. To increase the yield, the soil can be enriched by supplying these nutrients in the form of manure and fertilizers. uestions 1. What ar e macr o-nutrients and why ar e they called macr o- nutrients? 2. How do plants get nutrients? MANURE Manure contains large quantities of organic matter and also supplies small quantities of nutrients to the soil. Manure is prepared by the decomposition of animal excreta and plant waste. Manure helps in enriching soil with nutrients and organic matter and increasing soil fertility. The bulk of or ganic matter in manure helps in improving the soil structure. This involves incr easing the water holding capacity in sandy soils. In clayey soils, the large quantities of organic matter help in drainage and in avoiding water logging. In using manure we use biological waste material, which is advantageous in protecting Table 12.1: Nutrients suppliedTable 12.1: Nutrients suppliedTable 12.1: Nutrients suppliedTable 12.1: Nutrients suppliedTable 12.1: Nutrients supplied by air, water and soilby air, water and soilby air, water and soilby air, water and soilby air, water and soil Air carbon, oxygen Water hydrogen, oxygen Soil (i) Macronutrients: nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, calcium, magnesium, sulphur (ii) Micronutrients: iron, manganese, boron, zinc, copper , molybdenum, chlorine Q Source SourceSource SourceSource NutrientsNutrientsNutrientsNutrientsNutrients Reprint 2025-26
our environment from excessive use of Table 12.1; Nutrients supplied fertilizers. Using biological waste material is by air, water and soil also a way of recycling farm waste. Based on the kind of biological material used, manure Source Nutrients can be classified as: {i) Compost and vermi-compost: The Air carbon, oxygen process in which farm waste material like livestock excreta (cow dung, etc.), Water hydrogen, oxygen vegetable waste, animal refuse, Soil (i) Macronutrients: domestic waste, sewage waste, straw, nitrogen, phosphorus. eradicated weeds etc. is decomposed potassium, caleium, in pits is known as composting. The magnesium, sulphur compost is rich in organic matter and - . nutrients. Compost is also prepared (if) Micronutrients: iron, manganese. boron by using earthworms to hasten the inn Bs : . process of decomposition of plant and zine, copper, : . fire Tie ja palle molybdenum, chlorine animal retuse. This is called vermi-compost. . . {ii) Green manure: Prior to the sowing of Deficiency of these nutrients affects the crop seeds, some plants like sun physiological processes in plants including hemp or guar are grown and then reproduction, growth and susceptibility to mulched by ploughing them into the diseases. To increase the yield. the soil can be soil. These green plants thus turn into enriched by supplying these nutrients in the green manure which helps in form of manure and fertilizers. enriching the soil in nitrogen . and phosphorus. (" westious } 2. What are macro-mutrients aud FERTILIZERS | why are thev called macro- Fertilizers are commercially produced plant nutrients? nutrients. Fertilizers supply nitrogen, | | 2. Howde plants get nutrients? phosphorus and potassium. They are used wo) to ensure good vegetative growth (leaves, branches and flowers), giving rise to healthy plants. Fertilizers are a factor in the higher MANURE yields of high-cost farming. Fertilizers should be applied carefully in Manure contains large quantities of organic terms of proper dose, time, and observing pre- matter and also supplies small quantities of and post-application precautions for ‘their nutrients to the soil. Manure is prepared by complete utilisation. For example, sometimes the decomposition of animal excreta and plant fertilizers get washed away due to excessive waste. Manure helps in enriching soil with irrigation and are not fully absorbed by the nutrients and organic matter and increasing plants. This excess fertilizer then leads to soil fertility. The bulk of organic matter in water pollution. manure helps in improving the soil structure. Also, as we have seen in the previous class, This involves increasing the water holding — continuous use of fertilizers in an area can capacity in sandy soils. In clayey soils. the — destroy soil fertility because the organic large quantities of organic matter help in matter in the soil is not replenished and drainage and in avoiding water logging. micro-organisms in the soil are harmed by the In using manure we use biological waste __ fertilizers used. Short-term benefits of using material, which is advantageous in protecting — fertilizers and long-term benefits of using Isproveseat i Foop Reset ices 143 Reprint 2025-26 :