SCIENCE144 India has a wide variety of water resources and a highly varied climate. Under such conditions, several different kinds of irrigation systems are adopted to supply water to agricultural lands depending on the kinds of water resources available. These include wells, canals, rivers and tanks. • Wells: There are two types of wells, namely dug wells and tube wells. In a dug well, water is collected from water bearing strata. Tube wells can tap water fr om the deeper strata. Fr om these wells, water is lifted by pumps for irrigation. • Canals: This is usually an elaborate and extensive irrigation system. In this system canals receive water fr om one or more reservoirs or from rivers. The main canal is divided into branch canals having further distributaries to irrigate fields. • River Lift Systems : In ar eas where canal flow is insuf ficient or irregular due to inadequate r eservoir r elease, the lift system is more rational. Water is directly drawn fr om the rivers for supplementing irrigation in ar eas close to rivers. • Tanks: These ar e small storage reservoirs, which intercept and store the run-of f of smaller catchment areas. Fresh initiatives for increasing the water available for agricultur e include rainwater harvesting and watershed management. This involves building small check-dams which lead to an incr ease in gr ound water levels. The check-dams stop the rainwater fr om flowing away and also reduce soil erosion. 12.1.2 (iii) CROPPING PATTERNS Different ways of growing crops can be used to give maximum benefit. Mixed cropping is gr owing two or mor e crops simultaneously on the same piece of land, for example, wheat + gram, or wheat + mustard, or gr oundnut + sunflower . This reduces risk and gives some insurance against failure of one of the crops. manure for maintaining soil fertility have to be considered while aiming for optimum yields in crop production. uestion 1. Compare the use of manure and fertilizers in maintaining soil fertility. Organic farming is a farming system with minimal or no use of chemicals as fertilizers, herbicides, pesticides, etc., and with a maximum input of organic manures, recycled farm-wastes (straw and livestock excreta), use of bio-agents such as cultur e of blue green algae in pr eparation of biofertilizers, neem leaves or turmeric specifically in grain storage as bio-pesticides, with healthy cr opping systems [mixed cropping, inter-cropping and crop rotation as discussed below in 12.1.2.(iii)]. These cropping systems are beneficial in insect, pest and wheat control besides providing nutrients. 12.1.2 (ii) IRRIGATION Most agriculture in India is rain-fed, that is, the success of cr ops in most ar eas is dependent on timely monsoons and sufficient rainfall spread through most of the growing season. Hence, poor monsoons cause cr op failure. Ensuring that the crops get water at the right stages during their growing season can increase the expected yields of any crop. Therefore, many measures are used to bring more and more agricultural land under irrigation. Q More to know Droughts occur because of scarcity or irregular distribution of rains. Drought poses a threat to rain-fed farming areas, where farmers do not use irrigation for crop production and depend only on rain. Light soils have less water retention capacity. In areas with light soils, crops get adversely affected by drought conditions. Scientists have developed some crop varieties which can tolerate drought conditions. Reprint 2025-26
manure for maintaining soil fertility have to India has a wide variety of water resources be considered while aiming for optimum yields — and a highly varied climate. Under such in crop production. conditions, several different kinds of irrigation systems are adopted to supply water to westion agricultural lands depending on the kinds of . water resources available. These include wells, fo) Compare dhe use of manure and canals, rivers and tanks. ferdliaers ino maintaining soil e Wells: There are two types of wells. 4 fertility. namely dug wells and tube wells. In a dug well, water is collected from water Organic farming is a farming system with bearing strata. Tube wells can tap minimal or no use of chemicals as fertilizers, water from the deeper strata. From herbicides, pesticides, ete., and with a these wells, water is lifted by pumps maximum input of organic manures, recycled for irrigation. farm-wastes (straw and livestock excreta), use . Canals: This is usually an elaborate of bio-agents such as culture of blue green and extensive irrigation system. In this algae in preparation of biofertilizers, neem system canals receive water from one leaves or turmeric specifically in grain storage or more reservoirs or from rivers. The as bio-pesticides, with healthy cropping main canal is divided into branch systems [mixed cropping, inter -cropping and canals having further distributaries to crop rotation as discussed below in 12.1.2.{iii)]. irrigate fields. These cropping systems are beneficial in e = River Lift Systems: In areas where insect. pest and wheat control besides canal flow is insufficient or irregular providing nutrients. due to inadequate reservoir release, the lift system is more rational. Water 12.1.2 (ii) IRRIGATION is directly drawn from the rivers for Most agriculture in India is rain-fed, that is, supplementing irrigation in areas the success of crops in most areas is close to rivers. dependent on timely monsoons and sufficient ° Tanks: These are small storage rainfall spread through most of the growing reservoirs, which intercept and store season. Hence, poor monsoons cause crop the run-off of smaller catchment failure. Ensuring that the crops get water at areas. the right stages during their growing season Fresh initiatives for increasing the water can increase the expected yields of any crop. available for agriculture include rainwater Therefore, many measures are used to bring — harvesting and watershed management. This more and more agricultural land involves building small check-dams which under irrigation. lead to an increase in ground water levels. - The check-dams stop the rainwater from Droughts occur because of scarcity or flowing away and also reduce soil erosion. irregular distribution of rains. Drought Pag poses a threat to rain-fed farming 12.1.2 (iii) CROPPING PATTERNS eM areas, where farmers do not use & irrigation for crop production and Different ways of growing crops can be used depend only on rain. Light soils have to give maximum benefit. g less water retention capacity. In areas Mixed cropping is growing two or more kag with light soils, crops get adversely crops simultaneously on the same piece of em affected by drought conditions. land, for example, wheat + gram, or wheat + Peg Scientists have developed some crop mustard, or groundnut + sunflower. This varieties which can tolerate drought reduces risk and gives some insurance conditions. against failure of one of the crops. 144 Science. : Reprint 2025-26