IMPROVEMENT IN FOOD RESOURCES 149 beyond it. Popular marine fish varieties include pomphret, mackerel, tuna, sardines, and Bombay duck. Marine fish ar e caught using many kinds of fishing nets from fishing boats. Yields are increased by locating large schools of fish in the open sea using satellites and echo-sounders. Some marine fish of high economic value are also far med in seawater . This includes finned fishes like mullets, bhetki, and pearl spots, shellfish such as prawns (Fig. 12.5), mussels and oysters as well as seaweed. Oysters ar e also cultivated for the pearls they make. Macrobrachium rosenbergii (fresh water) Peneaus monodon (marine) Fig. 12.5 : Fresh water and marine prawns As marine fish stocks get further depleted, the demand for more fish can only be met by such cultur e fisheries, a practice called mariculture. 12.2.3 (ii) INLAND FISHERIES Fresh water resources include canals, ponds, reservoirs and rivers. Brackish water resour ces, where seawater and fr esh water mix together, such as estuaries and lagoons are also important fish r eservoirs. While capture fishing is also done in such inland water bodies, the yield is not high. Most fish production from these resources is thr ough aquaculture. Fish cultur e is sometimes done in combination with a rice crop, so that fish are grown in the water in the paddy field. Mor e intensive fish far ming can be done in composite fish cultur e systems. Both local and imported fish species ar e used in such systems. In such a system, a combination of five or six fish species is used in a single fishpond. These species ar e selected so that they do not compete for food among them having different types of food habits. As a result, the food available in all the parts of the pond is used. As Catlas are sur face feeders, Rohus feed in the middle-zone of the pond, Mrigals and Common Carps are bottom feeders, and Grass Carps feed on the weeds, together these species (Fig. 12.6) can use all the food in the pond without competing with each other. This increases the fish yield from the pond. (a) (b) (c) (d) Fig. 12.6: (a) Catla (b) Silver carp (c) Rohu (d) Grass Carp (e) Mrigal (f) Common Carp (e) (f) One problem with such composite fish culture is that many of these fish breed only during monsoon. Even if fish seed is collected from the wild, it can be mixed with that of other species as well. So, a major problem in fish farming is the lack of availability of good- quality seed. To overcome this problem, ways have now been worked out to breed these fish in ponds using hor monal stimulation. This has ensured the supply of pur e fish seed in desir ed quantities.