SCIENCE148 (ii) dwarf broiler parent for commercial chick production; (iii) summer adaptation capacity/ tolerance to high temperature; (iv) low maintenance requirements; (v) reduction in the size of the egg-laying bird with ability to utilise mor e fibrous cheaper diets for mulated using agricultural by-products. The ration (daily food requirement) for broilers is protein rich with adequate fat. The level of vitamins A and K is kept high in the poultry feeds. Poultry fowl suf fer fr om a number of diseases caused by virus, bacteria, fungi, parasites, as well as fr om nutritional deficiencies. These necessitate pr oper cleaning, sanitation, and spraying of disinfectants at regular intervals. Appropriate vaccination can pr event the occurr ence of infectious diseases and reduce loss of poultry during an outbreak of disease. uestions 1. What management practices are common in dairy and poultry farming? 2. What are the differences between broilers and layers and in their management? Activity _____________ 12.4 • Visit a local poultry farm. Observe types of breeds and note the type of ration, housing and lighting facilities given to them. Identify the growers, layers and broilers. 12.2.3FISH PRODUCTION Fish is a cheap source of animal protein for our food. Fish production includes the finned true fish as well as shellfish such as prawns and molluscs. There are two ways of obtaining fish. One is from natural resources, which is called capture fishing. The other way is by fish farming, which is called culture fishery. The water source of the fish can be either seawater or fresh water, such as in rivers and ponds. Fishing can thus be done both by capture and cultur e of fish in marine and freshwater ecosystems. 12.2.3 (i) MARINE FISHERIES India’s marine fishery resources include 7500 km of coastline and the deep seas Fig. 12.4 Aseel Leghorn uestion 1. Discuss the implications of the following statement: “It is inter esting to note that poultry is India’s most ef ficient converter of low fibre food stuf f (which is unfit for human consumption) into highly nutritious animal protein food.” EGG AND BROILER PRODUCTION Broiler chickens ar e fed with vitamin-rich supplementary feed for good growth rate and better feed efficiency. Care is taken to avoid mortality and to maintain feathering and carcass quality. They are produced as broilers and sent to market for meat purposes. For good production of poultry birds, good management practices are important. These include maintenance of temperatur e and hygienic conditions in housing and poultry feed, as well as pr evention and contr ol of diseases and pests. The housing, nutritional and environmental requirements of br oilers are somewhat different from those of egg layers. Q Q Reprint 2025-26
(ii) dwarf broiler parent for commercial The ration (daily food requirement) for broilers chick production: is protein rich with adequate fat. The level of {ii) summer adaptation capacity/ vitamins A and K is kept high in the poultry tolerance to high temperature: feeds. (iv) low maintenance requirements: Poultry fowl suffer from a number of (vy) reduction in the size of the egg-laying — diseases caused by virus, bacteria, fungi, bird with ability to utilise more parasites. as well as from nutritional fibrous cheaper diets formulated deficiencies. These necessitate proper using agricultural by-products. cleaning, sanitation, and spraying of disinfectants at regular intervals. Appropriate vaccination can prevent the occurrence of " ag. ar, G, infectious diseases and reduce loss of poultry is a= \' . during an outbreak of disease. L -) ree A) uestions : | | ¢@. Whatinanagement practices arc ] er > conmnon in dairy and powlay ae imei Y om | farming? Aseel Leghorn — | 2. Whatare the dittercnecs benveen | broflers and lavers and in their Fig. 12.4 managenicnl? westion M ; ae . Activity id 1. Discuss the implications of the following statement: . Visit a local poultry farm. Observe | “Hois intercsding ta note Cat types of breeds and note the type of | poultry is India's most ctticient ration. housing and lighting facilities | converter of low fibre food stutt given to them. Identity the growers, ww) . : an layers and broilers. (whieh is antic for human . consumption) into highly nutvidious aninua protcin food. 12.2.3 FISH PRODUCTION EGG AND BROILER PRODUCTION Fish is a cheap source of animal protein for . our food. Fish production includes the finned Broiler chickens are fed with vitamin-rich true fish as well as shellfish such as prawns supplementary feed for good growth rate and and molluses. There are two ways of obtaining better feed efficiency. Care is taken to avoid fish. One is from natural resources. which is mortality and to maintain feathering and — eatled capture fishing. The other way is by carcass quality. They are produced as broilers fish farming, which is called culture fishery. and sent to market for meat purposes. The water source of the fish can be either For good production of poultry birds, good seawater or fresh water, such as in rivers and management practices are important. These ponds. Fishing can thus be done both by include maintenance of temperature and — capture and culture of fish in marine and hygienic conditions in housing and poultry freshwater ecosystems. feed. as well as prevention and control of diseases and pests. 12.2.3 (i) MARINE FISHERIES The housing. nutritional and environmental requirements of broilers are — India’s marine fishery resources include somewhat different from those of egg layers. 7500 km of coastline and the deep seas 148 Science. : Reprint 2025-26