IMPROVEMENT IN FOOD RESOURCES 141 the kharif season from the month of June to October, and some of the crops are grown in the winter season, called the rabi season from November to April. Paddy, soyabean, pigeon pea, maize, cotton, gr een gram and black gram are kharif crops, wher eas wheat, gram, peas, mustard, linseed are rabi crops. In India ther e has been a four times increase in the production of food grains from 1952 to 2010 with only 25% increase in the cultivable land area. How has this incr ease in production been achieved? If we think of the practices involved in farming, we can see that we can divide it into thr ee stages. The first is the choice of seeds for planting. The second is the nurturing of the cr op plants. The third is the protection of the growing and harvested crops from loss. Thus, the major groups of activities for improving crop yields can be classified as: • Crop variety improvement • Crop production improvement • Crop protection management. 12.1.1CROP VARIETY IMPROVEMENT This approach depends on finding a crop variety that can give a good yield. Varieties or strains of crops can be selected by breeding for various useful characteristics such as disease r esistance, r esponse to fertilisers, product quality and high yields. One way of incorporating desirable characters into crop varieties is by hybridisation. Hybridisation refers to cr ossing between genetically dissimilar plants. This cr ossing may be intervarietal (between dif ferent varieties), interspecific (between two different species of the same genus) or inter generic (between different genera). Another way of impr oving the crop is by introducing a gene that would provide the desir ed characteristic. This results in genetically modified crops. For new varieties of crops to be accepted, it is necessary that the variety produces high yields under dif ferent conditions that ar e found in different areas. Farmers would need to be provided with good quality seeds of a particular variety, that is, the seeds should all Fig. 12.1: Different types of crops uestion 1. What do we get fr om cer eals, pulses, fruits and vegetables? Different crops require different climatic conditions, temperature and photoperiods for their growth and completion of their life cycle. Photoperiods are related to the duration of sunlight. Growth of plants and flowering are dependent on sunlight. As we all know, plants manufacture their food in sunlight by the process of photosynthesis. There are some crops, which are grown in rainy season, called Q Reprint 2025-26
iii | mic, . the Kharifseason from the month of June to j i. if BB og) : ry et October, and some of the crops are grown in {, | pS ‘A; sees 3, the winter season. called the rab/season from iB 3 SS SON, , See *s November to April. Paddy, soyabean, pigeon t | : = TAY ry (7 pea, maize, cotton, green gram and black .B i AOS foal 2 gram are Kharifcrops, whereas wheat, gram, Ps | ! ewe - peas, mustard, linseed are rabi crops. In India there has been a four times ep eta MA increase in the production of food grains from 5 ‘ Ge ¢ R at a - . 1952 to 2010 with only 25% increase in the it NN uy} a y 4s cultivable land area. How has this increase AME Bi ne 1a \ 3 4 - : y | in production been achieved’? If we think of ay ¥ a ES way fe cee the practices involved in farming, we can see 4 a : « is a" i that we can divide it into three stages. The ie \ : “Li first is the choice of seeds for planting. The ifiass* . A second is the nurturing of the crop plants. hy ee . The third is the protection of the growing and aE harvested crops from loss. Thus, the major groups of activities for improving crop yields mo a can be classified as: T ¢ Crop variety improvement ‘ | an e Crop production improvement & 1 | e Crop protection management. oy yy 12.1.1 Crop VARIETY IMPROVEMENT | | | ‘ This approach depends on finding a crop ee _ fg | variety that can give a good yield. Varieties or N . a : strains of crops can be selected by breeding _ > = RN for various useful characteristics such as disease resistance, response to fertilisers, Fig. 12.1: Different types of crops product quality and high yields. One way of incorporating desirable characters into crop \ westi varieties is by hybridisation. Hybridisation ff)ue SUON refers to crossing between genetically 1. What do we get tron cercals. dissimilar plants. This crossing may be | pulses, truits and vegetables? intervarietal (between different varieties), \ interspecific (between two different species of the same genus) or intergeneric (between <) different genera). Another way of improving Different crops require different climatic — the crop is by introducing a gene that would conditions, temperature and photoperiods for — provide the desired characteristic. This their growth and completion of their life cycle. results in genetically modified crops. Photoperiods are related to the duration of For new varieties of crops to be accepted, sunlight. Growth of plants and flowering are it is necessary that the variety produces high dependent on sunlight. As we all know, plants — yields under different conditions that are manufacture their food in sunlight by the — found in different areas. Farmers would need process of photosynthesis. There are some — to be provided with good quality seeds of a crops, which are grown in rainy season, called particular variety, that is, the seeds should all Isproveseat i Foop Reset ices 41 Reprint 2025-26 :