SCIENCE146 Activity 12.1 • Visit a nearby garden/agricultural field and make a list of the weeds and the flowers/crops found in the area. Also, make a list of insect pests, if any, infesting the flowers/crops. STORAGE OF GRAINS Storage losses in agricultural produce can be very high. Factors responsible for such losses are biotic— insects, rodents, fungi, mites and bacteria, and abiotic— inappropriate moisture and temperatures in the place of storage. These factors cause degradation in quality, loss in weight, poor germinability, discolouration of produce, all leading to poor marketability. These factors can be controlled by proper treatment and by systematic management of warehouses. Preventive and control measures are used before grains are stored for future use. They include strict cleaning of the produce before storage, proper drying of the produce first in sunlight and then in shade, and fumigation using chemicals that can kill pests. uestions 1. Why should preventive measures and biological control methods be preferred for protecting crops? 2. What factors may be responsible for losses of grains during storage? Activity 12.2 • Collect grains/seeds of cereals, pulses and oil seeds and gather information about the seasons in which they are sown and harvested. 12.2Animal Husbandry Animal husbandry is the scientific management of animal livestock. It includes various aspects such as feeding, breeding and disease contr ol. Animal-based far ming includes cattle, goat, sheep, poultry and fish farming. As the population increases and as living standar ds incr ease, the demand for milk, eggs and meat is also going up. Also, the gr owing awar eness of the need for humane treatment of livestock has br ought in new limitations in livestock farming. Thus, livestock production also needs to be improved. 12.2.1CATTLE FARMING Cattle husbandry is done for two purposes— milk and draught labour for agricultural work such as tilling, irrigation and carting. Indian cattle belong to two different species, Bos indicus, cows, and Bos bubalis , buf faloes. Milk-pr oducing females ar e called milch animals (dairy animals), while the ones used for farm labour are called draught animals. Milk production depends, to some extent, on the duration of the lactation period, meaning the period of milk production after Q Table 12.2: Nutritional values of animal products Animal Products Fat Protein Sugar Minerals Water Vitamins Milk (Cow) 3.60 4.00 4.50 0.70 87.20 B1, B2, B12, D, E Egg 12.00 13.00 * 1.00 74.00 B2, D Meat 3.60 21.10 * 1.10 74.20 B2, B12 Fish 2.50 19.00 * 1.30 77.20 Niacin, D, A *Present in very small amounts Per cent (%) Nutrients