SCIENCE142 be of the same variety and germinate under the same conditions. Cultivation practices and crop yield are related to weather, soil quality and availability of water. Since weather conditions such as dr ought and flood situations ar e unpredictable, varieties that can be grown in diverse climatic conditions ar e useful. Similarly, varieties tolerant to high soil salinity have been developed. Some of the factors for which variety improvement is done are: • Higher yield: T o increase the productivity of the crop per acr e. • Impr oved quality: Quality considerations of crop products vary from crop to cr op. Baking quality is important in wheat, protein quality in pulses, oil quality in oilseeds and preserving quality in fruits and vegetables. • Biotic and abiotic r esistance: Cr ops production can go down due to biotic (diseases, insects and nematodes) and abiotic (dr ought, salinity, water logging, heat, cold and frost) stresses under different situations. V arieties resistant to these stresses can improve crop production. • Change in maturity duration: The shorter the duration of the crop from sowing to harvesting, the mor e economical is the variety. Such short durations allow far mers to gr ow multiple r ounds of cr ops in a year . Short duration also r educes the cost of crop production. Uniform maturity makes the harvesting pr ocess easy and reduces losses during harvesting. • Wider adaptability: Developing varieties for wider adaptability will help in stabilising the crop production under dif fer ent envir onmental conditions. One variety can then be gr own under different climatic conditions in different areas. • Desirable agronomic characteristics: Tallness and pr ofuse branching ar e desirable characters for fodder crops. Dwarfness is desired in cereals, so that less nutrients are consumed by these crops. Thus developing varieties of desired agronomic characters help give higher productivity. uestions 1. How do biotic and abiotic factors affect crop production? 2. What are the desirable agronomic characteristics for crop improvements? 12.1.2CROP PRODUCTION MANAGEMENT In India, as in many other agriculture-based countries, farming ranges from small to very large farms. Different farmers thus have more or less land, money and access to information and technologies. In short, it is the money or financial conditions that allow farmers to take up different farming practices and agricultural technologies. There is a correlation between higher inputs and yields. Thus, the farmer’s purchasing capacity for inputs decides cropping system and production practices. Therefore, production practices can be at different levels. They include ‘no cost’ production, ‘low cost’ production and ‘high cost’ production practices. 12.1.2 (i) NUTRIENT MANAGEMENT Just as we need food for development, growth and well-being, plants also require nutrients for growth. Nutrients are supplied to plants by air , water and soil. Ther e ar e several nutrients which are essential for plants. Air supplies carbon and oxygen, hydrogen comes from water, and soil supplies the other thirteen nutrients to plants. Amongst these, some are required in large quantities and are therefore called macro-nutrients. The other nutrients are used by plants in small quantities and are therefore called micro-nutrients (Table 12.1). Q